URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20221007012337id_/https://aap2.silverchair-cdn.com/aap2/content_public/journal/pediatrics/150/3/10.1542_peds.2022-058859/2/peds_2022058859supplementarydata.pdf
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

Supplemental Information
Appendix A. Kernicterus
Nomenclature
The term kernicterus refers to the
permanent disabling neurologic
condition characterized by some or
all of the following: choreoathetoid
cerebral palsy, upward gaze paresis,
enamel dysplasia of deciduous teeth,
sensorineural hearing loss or auditory
neuropathy or dyssynchrony
spectrum disorder, and characteristic
findings on brain magnetic resonance
imaging.1
The term “kernicterus spectrum
disorder” (KSD) has been proposed to
provide a broader conceptualization
of kernicterus. KSD encompasses all
the neurologic sequelae of bilirubin
neurotoxicity including classic, motor-
predominant, and auditory-
predominant subtypes of the
continuum.2,3 This term also suggests
a possible association between subtle
adverse neurodevelopmental findings
and bilirubin concentrations well
below those linked to classical
kernicterus. However, the literature
linking subtle abnormalities with
bilirubin is conflicting, and there is no
evidence that treating infants at these
lower bilirubin concentrations
prevents these outcomes.4– 13
“Bilirubin-induced neurologic
dysfunction” is a term that has been
variously used to designate both
subtle neurodevelopmental findings
and all neurologic conditions
associated with exposure to
hazardous hyperbilirubinemia, as
well as a scoring system that
quantitatively describes the
progression and severity of acute
bilirubin encephalopathy (ABE). 5,11
Bilirubin-induced neurologic
dysfunction should be used as
originally intended as a score to
quantify the severity of ABE and
risk of an infant with ABE
subsequently developing kernicterus
or KSD 14,15; its use for entities for
which a causal effect of bilirubin has
not been demonstrated should be
avoided.
References for Kernicterus
Nomenclature
1. Perlman J, Volpe J. Bilirubin. In: Volpe
J, Inder T, Barras D, et al, eds. Volpe’s
Neurology of the Newborn. Philadel-
phia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:730–762
2. Dasari VR, Shapiro SM, Yeh HW, Geli-
neau-Morel R. kernicterus spectrum
disorders diagnostic toolkit: validation
using retrospective chart review.Pe-
diatr Res. 2022;91(4):862–866
3. Le Pichon JB, Riordan SM, Watchko J,
Shapiro SM. The neurological sequelae
of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia: defini-
tions, diagnosis and treatment of the
kernicterus spectrum disorders
(KSDs). Curr Pediatr Rev.
2017;13(3):199–209
4. Jangaard KA, Fell DB, Dodds L, Allen AC.
Outcomes in a population of healthy
term and near-term infants with serum
bilirubin levels of >or5325 micromol/
L( >or519 mg/dL) who were born in
Nova Scotia, Canada, between 1994 and
2000. Pediatrics.2008;122(1):119–124
5. Lunsing RJ. Subtle bilirubin-induced
neurodevelopmental dysfunction (BIND)
in the term and late preterm infant:
does it exist? Semin Perinatol.
2014;38(7):465–471
6. Lunsing RJ, Pardoen WF , Hadders-Algra
M. Neurodevelopment after moderate
hyperbilirubinemia at term. Pediatr
Res. 2013;73(5):655–660
7. Maimburg RD, Bech BH, Vaeth M,
Møller-Madsen B, Olsen J. Neonatal
jaundice, autism, and other disorders
of psychological development.
Pediatrics. 2010;126(5):872–878
8. Newman TB, Klebanoff MA. Neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia and long-term
outcome: another look at the Collabo-
rative Perinatal Project. Pediatrics.
1993;92(5):651–657
9. Newman TB, Liljestrand P , Jeremy RJ,
et al; Jaundice and Infant Feeding
Study Team. Outcomes among new-
borns with total serum bilirubin levels
of 25 mg per deciliter or more. NE n g l
JM e d .2006;354(18):
1889–1900
10. Scheidt PC, Mellits ED, Hardy JB, Drage
JS, Boggs TR. Toxicity to bilirubin in
neonates: infant development during
first year in relation to maximum neo-
natal serum bilirubin concentration.J
Pediatr.1977;91(2):292–297
11. Shapiro SM. Definition of the clini-
cal spectrum of kernicterus and bil-
irubin-induced neurologic
dysfunction (BIND). J Perinatol.
2005;25(1):54 –59
12. Soorani-Lunsing I, Woltil HA, Hadders-
Algra M. Are moderate degrees of
hyperbilirubinemia in healthy term
neonates really safe for the brain?
Pediatr Res. 2001;50(6):701–705
13. Vandborg PK, Hansen BM, Greisen G,
Mathiasen R, Kasper F, Ebbesen F.
Follow-up of extreme neonatal hyperbi-
lirubinaemia in 5- to 10-year-old
children: a Danish population-based
study. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2015;
57(4):378–384
14. Gamaleldin R, Iskander I, Seoud I, et al.
Risk factors for neurotoxicity in new-
borns with severe neonatal hyperbilirubi-
nemia.Pediatrics.2011;128(4):
e925–e931
15. Johnson L, Bhutani VK, Karp K, Sivieri
EM, Shapiro SM. Clinical report from
the pilot USA Kernicterus Registry
(1992 to 2004). J Perinatol. 2009;
29(suppl 1):S25–S45
Appendix B. Key Action Statement
Evidence Tables
The following tables summarize the
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 1

KAS 1 If the maternal antibody screen is positive or unknown because the mother did not have prenatal antibody screening, the infant should have a
direct antiglobulin test (DAT) and the infant ’s blood type should be determined as soon as possible using either cord or peripheral blood.
(Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade B, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality B
Beneﬁts Early DAT testing identi ﬁes newborn infants at risk for immune-mediated hemolytic disease and early
hyperbilirubinemia born to mothers who carry anti-erythrocyte antibodies.
Risk, harm, and cost Early DAT testing could involve an extra blood draw from newborn infants. There is a small risk of false-negative and
false-positive DAT test results.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Isoimmunization is the most common cause of severe hemolysis, and hyperbilirubinemia can progress rapidly. The
alternative to early DAT testing is to wait and only test if jaundice develops, which could miss the opportunity for
early intervention in some newborn infants with severe hemolysis. The bene ﬁt of knowing the risk for severe
hemolysis through early DAT testing likely exceeds the harm of a potential extra blood draw and the risk of a
false-negative or false-positive DAT in infants born to mothers with positive or unknown antibody screen results.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Minimal to none
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 1
KAS 2 Oral supplementation with water or dextrose water should not be provided to prevent hyperbilirubinemia or decrease bilirubin
concentrations. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade B, Strong Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality B
Beneﬁts (from not treating) Avoiding supplementation may help promote breastfeeding because supplementation has been associated with
reduced maternal con ﬁdence in breastfeeding and breastfeeding duration. One study found no difference in peak
serum bilirubin concentrations or the need for phototherapy among term breastfed newborn infants with
physiologic jaundice by whether they were fed supplemental water. Another study of breastfed term infants whose
weight was appropriate for gestational age found that supplementation with water or dextrose water was
associated with higher bilirubin concentrations on day 6 after birth.
Risk, harm, and cost There are no clear risks, harms, or costs associated with not routinely supplementing infants with water or dextrose
water who are not receiving phototherapy.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment There is no evidence of the bene ﬁt of routinely providing water or dextrose water supplementation and there are
possible harms, including interference with breastfeeding, hyponatremia, and water intoxication.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Minimal to none
Exclusions None
Strength Strong Recommendation
Key references 2 –6
KAS 3 Use TSB as the de ﬁnitive diagnostic test to guide phototherapy and escalation-of-care decisions, including exchange transfusion. (Aggregate
Evidence Quality Grade X, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Virtually all treatment studies are based on TSB concentrations.
Risk, harm, and cost There is some laboratory variation.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Using TSB can lead to timely treatment and may help reduce overtreatment in infants in whom TcB overestimates
TSB. However, there are no direct comparisons between TSB and TcB as a diagnostic test to distinguish between
babies in whom the bene ﬁts of treatment do and do not exceed the risks and costs and such studies are unlikely
to be performed.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Minimal to none
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 7 –11
2

KAS 4 All infants should be visually assessed for jaundice at least every 12 hours following delivery until discharge. TSB or TcB should be measured
as soon as possible for infants noted to be jaundiced <24 hours after birth. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X, Strong Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Onset of jaundice within 24 h of birth is more likely to be caused by hemolysis and to need treatment. Early
identiﬁcation of hyperbilirubinemia requiring treatment can lead to earlier initiation of phototherapy and reduce
the risk of needing to perform an exchange transfusion. Identi ﬁcation of jaundice with onset after 24 h can inform
decisions about measuring TcB or TSB and has the potential bene ﬁt of allowing parents to learn to recognize
jaundice.
Risk, harm, and cost Assessing for the onset of jaundice may require turning lights on in a previously dark room, which can interfere with
sleep and disturb the infant and other family members. This harm can be minimized if the examination is
conducted at the same time as other routine newborn care and by covering the infant ’s eyes or using focused
lighting away from the infant ’s eyes.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The bene ﬁts are likely to exceed harms, especially in the ﬁrst 24 h.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Parents may have preferences regarding the frequency or timing of these examinations that can be considered as
long as they occur at least every 12 h.
Exclusions None
Strength Strong Recommendation
Key references 12
KAS 5 The TcB or TSB should be measured between 24 and 48 hours after birth or prior to discharge if that occurs earlier. (Aggregate Evidence
Quality Grade C, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality C
Beneﬁts Routine TcB or TSB screening can identify signi ﬁcant but undetected hyperbilirubinemia. This bene ﬁt will be greater
among infants whose jaundice is harder to recognize. The TcB or TSB value can be used to plan for postdischarge
follow-up and the need for subsequent measures of TcB or TSB. This planning can help increase the timely
identiﬁcation of subsequent hyperbilirubinemia and also avoid unnecessary follow-up care or treatment.
Risk, harm, and cost TSB measurements can cause discomfort, which could be minimized by using TcB measures or obtaining additional
blood at the same time as the collection of the dried blood spot for newborn screening. In some newborn infants,
TcB measurements might lead to TSB measurements that would otherwise not have been performed and are not
high enough to affect management. This may be more likely in infants with greater skin melanin concentration
when JM TcB instruments are used. 8,13 There is a risk that hyperbilirubinemia could be detected that would have
resolved without treatment had it not been identi ﬁed. It is possible that the follow-up based on the TcB or TSB
measure could be more or less than what the infant needs. There is the possibility of a false sense of security
based on having a low TcB or TSB in infants with hyperbilirubinemia that presents later, such as from G6PD
deﬁciency. There are additional costs related to measuring TcB or TSB.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Evidence from large health care systems that implemented universal bilirubin screening suggest a decrease in the
already low incidence of infants who reach a TSB $25 mg/dL, with a number needed to screen in the range of
1000 to 6000. The number needed to screen to prevent one infant from reaching a TSB $30 mg/dL is
approximately 15 000. The screening test alone does not directly lead to the bene ﬁt, but instead relies on follow-up
care including subsequent TSB measurements and treatment with phototherapy. The effect on health disparities is
uncertain but probably small: an increase in sensitivity at identifying signi ﬁcantly jaundiced babies, which may
disproportionately bene ﬁt babies with greater skin melanin concentration, but possible increase in unnecessary
TSB testing in this group. There are no randomized trials of bilirubin screening.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Parents may prefer strategies to minimize the number of heel pricks or venipunctures and, therefore, prefer TcB
compared with TSB.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 13 –22
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 3

KAS 6 TSB should be measured if the TcB exceeds or is within 3 mg/dL of the phototherapy treatment threshold or if the TcB is $15 mg/dL.
(Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade C, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality C
Beneﬁts The TcB is a good screening test but is not accurate enough to determine treatment decisions. TSB provides a better
guide for treatment decisions than the TcB because studies of hyperbilirubinemia risk prediction and studies of
treatment have been based on the TSB. As the TcB approaches the phototherapy treatment thresholds, the
likelihood that the TSB will change management increases.
Risk, harm, and cost There is a risk of an unnecessary blood test when the TSB might not change management. Infants whose skin has
greater melanin concentration tend to have higher TcB measurements with JM instruments, 8,13,22 increasing the
risk of unnecessary blood tests, whereas infants with greater skin melanin concentration and higher TSB levels
may have slightly lower TcB with Spectrix instruments. However, these differences are relatively small.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The bene ﬁt of having a more accurate measure to guide treatment decisions outweighs the discomfort associated
with measuring the TSB.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences In borderline cases, especially if one or more TcB measurements has been greater than a contemporaneous TSB
level, parents may prefer to rely on the TcB.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 8, 23, 24
KAS 7 If more than 1 TcB or TSB measure is available, the rate of increase may be used to identify higher risk of subsequent hyperbilirubinemia. A
rapid rate of increase ( $0.3 mg/dL per hour in the ﬁrst 24 hours or $0.2 mg/dL per hour thereafter) is exceptional and suggests hemolysis.
In this case, obtain a DAT if not previously done. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade D, Option)
Aggregate Evidence Quality D
Beneﬁts Identi ﬁcation of a rapid rate of increase could lead to the identi ﬁcation of unrecognized hemolysis.
Risk, harm, and cost Insuf ﬁcient evidence is available to assess the test accuracy of different thresholds for the rate of rise or to
recommend routinely obtaining more than 1 TcB or TSB measure.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Although the balance of bene ﬁt and harm cannot be determined, evaluating the rate of rise could help detect
unrecognized hemolysis.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Because this is an option, a parental preference to avoid monitoring might lead to having only 1 TcB or TSB measure
available. In that case, the rate of rise cannot be calculated. However, once a rapid rate of rise is identi ﬁed, a DAT
should be obtained if not previously even if parents prefer to avoid additional testing because of the importance of
DAT in making treatment decisions.
Exclusions None
Strength Option
Key references 25, 26
KAS 8 If appropriate follow-up cannot be arranged for an infant recommended to have an outpatient follow-up bilirubin measure, discharge may be
delayed. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade D, Option)
Aggregate Evidence Quality D
Beneﬁts Follow-up after discharge for some families can be challenging and potentially contribute to missing the opportunity
for timely treatment of hyperbilirubinemia.
Risk, harm, and cost Delay in discharge can be dif ﬁcult for families and increase nursery-related expenses.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The balance of bene ﬁt and harm depend on the risk of hyperbilirubinemia and the challenge of follow-up. Extending
access for newborn follow-up can reduce the need to delay discharge.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Shared decision making can help inform the bene ﬁt-harm assessment.
Exclusions None
Strength Option
Key references 27
4

KAS 9 For breastfed infants who are still jaundiced at 3 to 4 weeks of age, and for formula-fed infants who are still jaundiced at 2 weeks of age, the
total and direct-reacting (or conjugated) bilirubin concentrations should be measured to identify possible pathologic cholestasis. (Aggregate
Evidence Quality Grade X, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Although cholestasis is uncommon, early detection of pathologic causes of cholestasis, such as biliary atresia or
certain metabolic diseases, can lead to improved health outcomes.
Risk, harm, and cost The harm is an additional blood test and the pain associated with any additional evaluation based on the laboratory
ﬁndings. The additional costs are those associated with the blood test and additional evaluation.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The bene ﬁt of early identi ﬁcation and treatment of pathologic causes of cholestasis outweighs the harm of the testing
and subsequent evaluation among infants who are still jaundiced at 2 wk of age.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Parents may prefer to measure TSB at the 2-wk visit rather than returning for a TSB level at 4 wk.
Exclusions None
Strength Exceptional situation
Key references 28 –30
KAS 10 Intensive phototherapy is recommended at the total serum bilirubin thresholds in Fig 2 (Supplemental Table 1 and Supplemental Fig 1) or
Fig 3 (Supplemental Table 2 and Supplemental Figure 2) on the basis of gestational age, hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors, and
age of the infant in hours. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Intensive phototherapy can reduce TSB levels and decrease the need for escalation of care, including the need for
exchange transfusion, to prevent kernicterus. The phototherapy treatment thresholds are higher than those in the
2004 guideline but still leave a wide margin of safety. Compared with the 2004 guideline, overtreatment will be
decreased.
Risk, harm, and cost Phototherapy may lead to separation of mother and baby, maternal anxiety, and reduce breastfeeding. Phototherapy
can lead to oxidative stress and DNA damage, although these risks appear to be lower with LED-based
phototherapy. Two observational studies found a small increased risk of epilepsy in males treated with
phototherapy. If the ﬁndings are causal, for approximately each 100 to 250 males treated with phototherapy, 1 will
be diagnosed with epilepsy by 10 years of age. Hospitalization for phototherapy can increase costs because of a
prolonged initial hospital stay or the need for readmission. See the technical report appendix for a review of other
risks of phototherapy.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Bene ﬁts are believed to exceed potential harms at the phototherapy treatment thresholds in this guideline. A
weakness of the evidence linking speci ﬁc TSB levels to adverse neurologic outcomes is that studies are typically
based on maximum TSB levels, which are not known when decisions to initiate phototherapy are made. Even at the
treatment thresholds in this guideline, the number needed to treat to prevent 1 infant from receiving an exchange
transfusion may be in the hundreds or thousands, and the number needed to treat to prevent 1 case of
kernicterus is considerably higher. The more the TSB exceeds the phototherapy threshold, the lower the number
that will be needed to treat to prevent the need for an exchange transfusion or prevent kernicterus.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences The phototherapy treatment thresholds are based on expert opinion. Some families might choose to accept a higher
probability of unnecessary treatment and begin phototherapy below recommended thresholds to reduce the risk of
a rehospitalization and its accompanying costs and inconvenience. Other families, with infants with TSB levels at or
<2 mg/dL above thresholds, may prefer only blanket phototherapy (in the hospital or at home) or withholding
phototherapy and very close follow-up of TSB concentrations.
Exclusions None
Strength The evidence is strong that phototherapy reduces TSB concentrations and the need for exchange transfusion. The
evidence is weak regarding the speci ﬁc phototherapy treatment threshold at which bene ﬁts exceeds harms. This is
a recommendation because the guideline thresholds were set to reduce overtreatment while not missing the
potential bene ﬁt for reducing the risk of exchange transfusion or kernicterus.
Key references 31 –38
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 5

KAS 11 For newborn infants who have already been discharged and then develop a TSB above the phototherapy threshold, treatment with a home
LED-based phototherapy device rather than readmission to the hospital is an option for infants who meet the following criteria: gestational
age $38 weeks, $48 hours old, clinically well with adequate feeding, no known hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors (Table 2), no
previous phototherapy, TSB concentration no more than 1 mg/dL above the phototherapy treatment threshold (Fig 2, Supplemental Table 1,
Supplemental Fig 1), an LED-based phototherapy device will be available in the home without delay, and TSB can be measured daily.
(Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade D, Option)
Aggregate Evidence Quality D
Beneﬁts Home phototherapy for infants already discharged can help avoid readmission.
Risk, harm, and cost Home phototherapy might not prevent signi ﬁcant hyperbilirubinemia if it is not used correctly and there is not close
clinical follow-up. Infants with any risk factor are more likely to develop worsening hyperbilirubinemia even with
appropriate home therapy use.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The balance of bene ﬁt and harm depend on the risk of worsening hyperbilirubinemia.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Shared decision making can help inform the bene ﬁt-harm assessment. As with inpatient phototherapy, beginning
home phototherapy at a somewhat lower threshold could reduce the readmission risk. Some families may prefer
inpatient treatment, especially if lactation support is more available for inpatients than outpatients.
Exclusions None
Strength Option
Key references 39, 40
KAS 12 For hospitalized infants, TSB should be measured within 12 hours after starting phototherapy. The timing of the initial TSB measure after
starting phototherapy and the frequency of TSB monitoring during phototherapy should be guided by the age of the child, the presence of
hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors, the TSB concentration, and the TSB trajectory. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X,
Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Early identi ﬁcation of infants without adequate response to phototherapy can lead to earlier escalation of care,
potentially averting the need for an exchange transfusion and possibly preventing kernicterus. Early identi ﬁcation
of infants whose TSB has decreased will facilitate timely discontinuation of phototherapy.
Risk, harm, and cost There is a small risk that some infants would receive escalation of care who would have responded to phototherapy
without additional interventions. There are costs associated with the additional testing.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Although most infants treated with phototherapy will not require escalation of care, missing an infant could lead to
signiﬁcant harm. More frequent TSB measurements might allow earlier discontinuation of phototherapy, which
might reduce the risk of adverse effects associated with phototherapy and would reduce costs.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences For some families, the bene ﬁto f ﬁnding out sooner that phototherapy can be discontinued might lead to a preference
for more frequent blood tests.
Exclusions None
Strength Exceptional situation
Key references 41 –43
KAS 13 For infants receiving home phototherapy, the TSB should be measured daily. Infants should be admitted for inpatient phototherapy if the TSB
increases and the difference between the TSB and the phototherapy threshold narrows or the TSB is $ 1mg/dL above the phototherapy
threshold. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts TSB measurement is the only way to document whether there has been a response to phototherapy and to determine
when phototherapy can be discontinued.
Risk, harm, and cost TSB measurement is associated with discomfort and for those infants who have been discharged, there will often be
the need to travel to a clinic or laboratory. For some families, travel can be dif ﬁcult, and some infants might
require an emergency department visit for TSB testing. TSB measurement increases cost.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The overall bene ﬁt of assessing response to phototherapy outweighs the harms and additional expense of daily TSB
testing for infants receiving home phototherapy.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Families might prefer a slightly higher or lower frequency of TSB monitoring. Factors that could in ﬂuence this include
the values of the previous TSB concentrations.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 39, 44, 45
6

KAS 14 For infants requiring phototherapy, measure the hemoglobin concentration, hematocrit, or complete blood count to assess for the presence
of anemia and to provide a baseline in case subsequent anemia develops. Evaluate the underlying cause or causes of hyperbilirubinemia in
infants who require phototherapy by obtaining a DAT in infants whose mother had a positive antibody screen or whose mother is blood
group O regardless of Rh(D) status or whose mother is Rh(D) /C0. G6PD activity should be measured in any infant with jaundice of unknown
cause whose TSB increases despite intensive phototherapy, whose TSB increases suddenly or increases after an initial decline, or who
requires escalation of care. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Identifying the cause of hyperbilirubinemia might identify a previously unrecognized diagnosis that leads to the need
for additional care.
Risk, harm, and cost Additional laboratory tests and related costs.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The estimated overall bene ﬁt of providing potentially useful information is expected to outweigh the potential harms.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Some families might place added value in knowing the cause of the hyperbilirubinemia, especially if it could inform
the care of future pregnancies.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 46 –54
KAS 15 Discontinuing phototherapy is an option when the TSB has decreased by at least 2 mg/dL below the hour-speci ﬁc threshold at the initiation
of phototherapy. A longer period of phototherapy is an option if there are risk factors for rebound hyperbilirubinemia (eg, gestational age
<38 weeks, age <48 hours at the start of phototherapy, hemolytic disease). (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade C, Option)
Aggregate Evidence Quality C
Beneﬁts Discontinuing phototherapy as soon as it is safe reduces unnecessary exposure to phototherapy while minimizing the
risk of rebound hyperbilirubinemia.
Risk, harm, and cost Stopping phototherapy too soon increases the risk that it will need to be restarted again. The cost and inconvenience
of restarting phototherapy is greater when it would require readmission to the hospital. Continuing phototherapy
longer than necessary increases costs and might increase the risk of adverse effects.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Suggested levels for discontinuing phototherapy re ﬂect an attempt to minimize both the duration of phototherapy and
need to initiate it again. Different families and clinicians may have different values for these con ﬂicting goals;
estimation of the risk of signi ﬁcant rebound hyperbilirubinemia can facilitate joint decision making.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Parents wanting to end phototherapy sooner may be willing to accept a higher risk of rebound; those who want to
reduce even a small risk of readmission may wish to continue the phototherapy until the TSB is lower.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 55, 56
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 7

KAS 16 Follow-up bilirubin measurement after phototherapy is based on the risk of rebound hyperbilirubinemia. Infants who exceeded the
phototherapy threshold during the birth hospitalization and (1) received phototherapy before 48 hours of age; (2) had a positive DAT; or (3)
had known or suspected hemolytic disease, should have TSB measured 6 to 12 hours after phototherapy discontinuation and a repeat
bilirubin measured on the day after phototherapy discontinuation. All other infants who exceeded the phototherapy threshold during the
birth hospitalization should have bilirubin measured the day after phototherapy discontinuation. Infants who received phototherapy during
the birth hospitalization and who were later readmitted for exceeding the phototherapy threshold should have bilirubin measured the day
after phototherapy discontinuation. Infants readmitted because they exceeded the phototherapy threshold following discharge but who did
not receive phototherapy during the birth hospitalization and infants treated with home phototherapy who exceeded the phototherapy
threshold should have bilirubin measured in 1 to 2 days after phototherapy discontinuation or clinical follow-up 1 to 2 days after
phototherapy to determine whether to obtain a bilirubin measurement. Risk factors for rebound hyperbilirubinemia to consider in this
determination include the TSB at the time of phototherapy discontinuation in relationship to the phototherapy threshold, gestational age
<38 weeks, the adequacy of feeding and weight gain, and other hyperbilirubinemia and hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors. It is an
option to measure TcB instead of TSB if it has been at least 24 hours since phototherapy was stopped. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X,
Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Following up closely with infants discharged early or with hyperbilirubinemia risk factors can lead to more timely
identiﬁcation of those who need treatment. Infants who required phototherapy should be followed closely because
of the risk of rebound hyperbilirubinemia. TcB is reliable after 24 h of phototherapy and can, therefore, be used
instead of TSB.
Risk, harm, and cost Some infants might receive additional TSB or TcB testing or have clinic follow-up that might not be necessary.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The bene ﬁts of identifying infants with hyperbilirubinemia that develops after discharge or infants with rebound
hyperbilirubinemia exceeds the associated follow-up risks.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Parents wanting to avoid additional testing or clinic follow-up might accept a higher risk of delayed detection of
hyperbilirubinemia. However, other parents might want closer follow-up to avoid this risk.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 55 –58
KAS 17 Care should be escalated when an infant ’s TSB reaches or exceeds the escalation-of-care threshold, de ﬁned as 2 mg/dL below the exchange
transfusion threshold, as detailed in Fig 5 (infants with no known hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors; Supplemental Table 3 and
Supplemental Fig 3) or Fig 6 (infants whose TSB is increasing despite phototherapy and or infants with at least one recognized hyperbilirubi-
nemia neurotoxicity risk factor; Supplemental Table 4 and Supplemental Fig 4). (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Escalation of care below the exchange transfusion threshold may prevent the need for an exchange transfusion or
allow for a timelier exchange transfusion if it is necessary, which could help prevent kernicterus.
Risk, harm, and cost Some infants for whom care is escalated may have experienced a leveling off or decrease in TSB without this
additional care. Escalation of care can lead to separation of mother and baby and greater costs if transfer to
another hospital is required.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The overall bene ﬁt of escalation of care to potentially avoid the need for an exchange transfusion and to be prepared
to provide an exchange transfusion in as safe a manner as possible is believed to outweigh the potential harms at
about the TSB concentrations at which escalation of care is recommended. The TSB concentration or trajectory at
which the bene ﬁts of escalation of care exceed the risks and costs is not known, and will vary with individual
circumstances, such as the proximity of a NICU.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Decisions regarding NICU transfer can be dif ﬁcult, especially if this would require transfer to another hospital or
separation from the mother. Parent preferences should be considered in in borderline cases.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 37, 59
8

KAS 18 For infants requiring escalation of care, blood should be sent STAT for total and direct-reacting serum bilirubin, a complete blood count,
serum albumin, serum chemistries, and type and crossmatch. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Avoiding delays for infants who require exchange transfusion can improve outcomes. Knowledge of the albumin level
and complete blood count results can inform exchange transfusion decisions and the differential diagnosis of the
hyperbilirubinemia.
Risk, harm, and cost Some infants might receive additional testing that might not be necessary.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The bene ﬁts of being prepared for an exchange transfusion outweigh the harm of additional testing.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences None
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references Expert opinion
KAS 19 Infants requiring escalation of care should receive intravenous hydration and emergent intensive phototherapy. A neonatologist should
be consulted for transfer to a neonatal intensive care unit that can perform an exchange transfusion. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade C,
Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality C
Beneﬁts Emergent intensive phototherapy and intravenous (IV) hydration can increase the rate of decline in TSB and may
prevent the need for an exchange transfusion.
Risk, harm, and cost The risks and costs of short-term intensive phototherapy and IV hydration are small and minimal compared with the
possibility of an exchange transfusion.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The possible bene ﬁt of preventing an exchange transfusion outweighs the potential harm.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Parents might choose to defer IV hydration if obtaining vascular access is dif ﬁcult and the TSB is stabilizing.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 60 –65
KAS 20 TSB should be measured at least every 2 hours from the start of the escalation-of-care period until the escalation-of-care period ends. Once
the TSB is lower than the escalation-of-care threshold, management should proceed according to the section “C. Monitoring Infants Receiving
Phototherapy.” (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade X, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Frequent measurement of TSB provides timely guidance regarding the ef ﬁcacy of phototherapy and the possible need
for an exchange transfusion.
Risk, harm, and cost Frequent TSB monitoring requires repeated blood sampling and laboratory testing.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Infants who require escalation of care bene ﬁt from frequent monitoring to identify if or when they qualify for an
exchange transfusion. The bene ﬁt of identifying those who exceed exchange thresholds as soon as possible
outweighs the possible harms from the risks and costs of frequent blood sampling and laboratory testing.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Minimal to none
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references Expert opinion
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 9

KAS 21 Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG; 0.5 – 1 g/kg) over 2 hours may be provided to infants with isoimmune hemolytic disease (ie, positive DAT)
whose TSB reaches or exceeds escalation of care threshold. The dose can be repeated in 12 hours. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade C,
Option)
Aggregate Evidence Quality C
Beneﬁts Use of IVIG during escalation of care may reduce homolysis and thereby stabilize or reduce TSB concentrations,
preventing the need for exchange transfusion.
Risk, harm, and cost The effect of IVIG for immune-mediated hemolytic disease has been understudied with con ﬂicting evidence supporting
a reduction in exchange transfusions. Recent investigations using routine single early dose prophylactic IVIG do not
demonstrate bene ﬁt in reducing the need for exchange transfusion and the routine use of prophylactic IVIG in
DAT1 neonates should be discouraged. However, targeted dosing may be more effective. Although observational
studies suggest that IVIG may be associated with necrotizing enterocolitis, the risk of necrotizing enterocolitis with
exchange transfusion is well documented so the bene ﬁts of IVIG may outweigh this potential harm when exchange
thresholds are approached.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The bene ﬁts of IVIG are not clear, and there is a small risk of harm. Treatment with IVIG may be more strongly
considered if there is a poor response to phototherapy and there is dif ﬁculty in obtaining an exchange transfusion.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Some families may want to avoid IVIG treatment given limited evidence for its effectiveness, especially for Rh 1 infants
and the potential risk of necrotizing enterocolitis.
Exclusions None
Strength Option
Key references Technical report and 66 –75
KAS 22 An urgent exchange transfusion should be performed for infants with signs of intermediate or advanced stages of intermediate or advanced
stages of acute bilirubin encephalopathy (eg, hypertonia, arching, retrocollis, opisthotonos, high-pitched cry, or recurrent apnea). (Aggregat e
Evidence Quality Grade C, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality C
Beneﬁts There are some case reports and case series that suggest an immediate exchange transfusion may prevent
kernicterus in some infants already showing signs of intermediate to advanced stages of bilirubin encephalopathy,
and reduction of the time the brain is exposed to high TSB concentration may also reduce the severity of chronic
bilirubin encephalopathy if it develops.
Risk, harm, and cost The risks of exchange transfusion include death, necrotizing enterocolitis, apnea, hypocalcemia and other electrolyte
abnormalities, and thrombocytopenia. The infectious risks from donor blood products are low. The costs of an
exchange transfusion are incompletely described but at least thousands of dollars.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The bene ﬁt of avoiding kernicterus or reducing its severity among newborns already showing signs of intermediate or
advanced acute bilirubin encephalopathy probably exceed the risks and costs of exchange transfusion.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Some parents have a strong preference to avoid blood products.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 59, 64, 65, 76 –82
10

KAS 23 An urgent exchange transfusion should be performed for infants if the TSB is at or above the exchange transfusion threshold. If, while
preparing for the exchange transfusion but before starting the exchange transfusion, a TSB concentration is below the exchange transfusion
threshold and the infant does not show signs of intermediate or advanced stages of acute bilirubin encephalopathy, then the exchange
transfusion may be deferred while continuing intensive phototherapy and following the TSB every 2 hours until the TSB is below the
escalation of care threshold. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade C, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality C
Beneﬁts Treatment at these levels may prevent kernicterus.
Risk, harm, and cost The risks of exchange transfusion include death, necrotizing enterocolitis, apnea, hypocalcemia and other electrolyte
abnormalities, and thrombocytopenia. The infectious risks from donor blood products are low. The costs of an
exchange transfusion are incompletely described but at least thousands of dollars.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment Studies are not suf ﬁcient to set a de ﬁnite TSB concentration or duration of time with TSB above exchange thresholds
at which the kernicterus-preventing bene ﬁts of exchange transfusion exceed the risks and costs. These thresholds
may differ in low- and middle-income countries, where the risk of kernicterus may be substantially higher. The
potential bene ﬁts of exchange transfusions are unlikely to exceed risks at the exchange thresholds in the AAP 2004
guideline. Whether bene ﬁts exceed risk at these levels is not known. The exchange transfusion thresholds were
raised in this guideline to decrease the likelihood of harm while still recommending treatment of infants most
likely to bene ﬁt.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Given uncertainty about what the exchange transfusion thresholds should be, parent preferences may be considered.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 35, 59, 83 –86
KAS 24 Beginning at least 12 hours after birth, if discharge is being considered, the difference between the bilirubin concentration measured
closest to discharge and the phototherapy threshold at the time of the bilirubin measurement should be calculated and used to guide
follow-up, as detailed in Fig 7. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade C, Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality C
Beneﬁts These recommendations for timing of follow-up after discharge seek to improve follow-up of those at highest risk of
developing jaundice that will bene ﬁt from treatment while minimizing unnecessary visits and laboratory testing.
Risk, harm, and cost These guidelines for follow-up may lead to some infants with signi ﬁcant hyperbilirubinemia being detected late or
missed and others receiving more visits or earlier visits than were needed to detect and manage their
hyperbilirubinemia.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment These thresholds for bilirubin testing and follow-up seek to balance bene ﬁt and harm, but necessarily depend on
value judgements. Depending on the level of concern about jaundice and the dif ﬁculty of outpatient follow-up and
bilirubin testing, clinicians and families can jointly decide on more or less aggressive follow-up, especially with TSB
concentrations close to the cutoffs suggested here.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Parent preferences around the speci ﬁc timing of TcB or TSB monitoring can be considered given the gaps in
evidence.
Exclusions None
Strength Recommendation
Key references 20, 87 –91
KAS 25 Before discharge, all families should receive written and verbal education about neonatal jaundice. Parents should be provided written
information to facilitate postdischarge care, including the date, time, and place of the follow-up appointment and, when necessary, a
prescription and appointment for a follow-up TcB or TSB. Birth hospitalization information, including the last TcB or TSB and the age at which
it was measured, and DAT results (if any) should be transmitted to the primary care provider who will see the infant at follow-up. If there is
uncertainty about who will provide the follow-up care, this information should also be provided to families. (Aggregate Evidence Quality Grade
X, Strong Recommendation)
Aggregate Evidence Quality X
Beneﬁts Educating families and providing explicit instructions for follow-up can decrease the risk of missed cases of
hyperbilirubinemia or other problems requiring treatment.
Risk, harm, and cost There is a small risk of causing anxiety. The costs of providing the information and appropriate education are
minimal.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment The bene ﬁts far exceed the potential harms.
Intentional vagueness None
Role of patient preferences Parents value complete information about their newborn infants.
Exclusions None
Strength Strong recommendation
Key references 92
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 11

evidence for each key statement
according to the AAP evidence
review process.
REFERENCES FOR KEY ACTION
STATEMENTS
REFERENCES
1. Lieberman L, Callum J, Cohen R, et al.
Impact of red blood cell alloimmuniza-
tion on fetal and neonatal outcomes: a
single center cohort study. Transfu-
sion. 2020;60(11):2537–2546
2. de Carvalho M, Hall M, Harvey D.
Effects of water supplementation on
physiological jaundice in breast-fed
babies. Arch Dis Child. 1981;56(7):
568–569
3. Nicoll A, Ginsburg R, Tripp JH. Supple-
mentary feeding and jaundice in new-
borns. Acta Paediatr Scand.
1982;71(5):759–761
4. McCoy MB, Heggie P . In-hospital for-
mula feeding and breastfeeding dura-
tion. Pediatrics. 2020;146(1):
e20192946
5. Chantry CJ, Dewey KG, Peerson JM,
Wagner EA, Nommsen-Rivers LA.
In-hospital formula use increases early
breastfeeding cessation among first-time
mothers intending to exclusively breast-
feed. J Pediatr.2014;164(6):1339–45.e5
6. Hinic K. Predictors of breastfeeding
confidence in the early postpartum
period. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal
Nurs. 2016;45(5):649–660
7. Greene DN, Liang J, Holmes DT, Resch
A, Lorey TS. Neonatal total bilirubin
measurements: still room for harmoniza-
tion. Clin Biochem.2014;47(12):1112–1115
8. Taylor JA, Burgos AE, Flaherman V,
et al; Better Outcomes through
Research for Newborns Network.
Discrepancies between transcutaneous
and serum bilirubin measurements.
Pediatrics. 2015;135(2):224–231
9. Lo SF, Doumas BT. The status of
bilirubin measurements in US labora-
tories: why is accuracy elusive? Semin
Perinatol. 2011;35(3):141–147
10. Lo SF, Doumas BT, Ashwood ER. Perfor-
mance of bilirubin determinations in
US laboratories–revisited. Clin Chem.
2004;50(1):190–194
11. Engle WD, Jackson GL, Engle NG.
Transcutaneous bilirubinometry.Semin
Perinatol. 2014;38(7):438–451
12. Newman TB, Liljestrand P , Escobar GJ.
Jaundice noted in the first 24 hours
after birth in a managed care organi-
zation. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med.
2002;156(12):1244–1250
13. Maya-Enero S, Candel-Pau J, Garcia-Garcia
J, Duran-Jord/C18aX ,L /C19opez-V/C19 ılchez MA. Reli-
ability of transcutaneous bilirubin deter-
mination based on skin color determined
by a neonatal skin color scale of our
own. Eur J Pediatr.2021;180(2):
607–616
14. Eggert LD, Wiedmeier SE, Wilson J,
Christensen RD. The effect of institut-
ing a prehospital-discharge newborn
bilirubin screening program in an
18-hospital health system. Pediatrics.
2006;117(5):e855–e862
15. Mah MP , Clark SL, Akhigbe E, et al.
Reduction of severe hyperbilirubinemia
after institution of predischarge bilirubin
screening.Pediatrics.2010;125(5):
e1143–e1148
16. Bhutani VK, Stark AR, Lazzeroni LC, et al;
Initial Clinical Testing Evaluation and Risk
Assessment for Universal Screening for
Hyperbilirubinemia Study Group. Predis-
charge screening for severe neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia identifies infants who
need phototherapy.J Pediatr.2013;162(3):
477–482.e1
17. Newman TB, Kemper AR. Avoiding harm
from hyperbilirubinemia screening.
JAMA Pediatr.2019;173(12):1208–1209
18. Grosse SD, Prosser LA, Botkin JR.
Screening for neonatal hyperbilirubine-
mia-first do no harm? JAMA Pediatr.
2019;173(7):617–618
19. Kuzniewicz MW, Escobar GJ, Newman
TB. Impact of universal bilirubin
screening on severe hyperbilirubinemia
and phototherapy use.Pediatrics.
2009;124(4):1031–1039
20. Kuzniewicz MW, Park J, Niki H, Walsh
EM, McCulloch CE, Newman TB.
Predicting the need for phototherapy
after discharge. Pediatrics. 2021;
147(5):e2020019778
21. Wainer S, Parmar SM, Allegro D, Rabi Y ,
Lyon ME. Impact of a transcutaneous
bilirubinometry program on resource
utilization and severe hyperbilirubinemia.
Pediatrics.2012;129(1):77–86
22. Maisels MJ, Ostrea EM Jr, Touch S,
et al. Evaluation of a new transcutane-
ous bilirubinometer.Pediatrics.
2004;113(6):1628–1635
23. Rubaltelli FF , Gourley GR, Loskamp N,
et al. Transcutaneous bilirubin mea-
surement: a multicenter evaluation of
an e wd e v i c e .Pediatrics.
2001;107(6):1264–1271
24. Bhutani VK, Gourley GR, Adler S,
Kreamer B, Dalin C, Johnson LH.
Noninvasive measurement of total
serum bilirubin in a multiracial predis-
charge newborn population to assess
the risk of severe hyperbilirubinemia.
Pediatrics.2000;106(2):E17
25. Kuzniewicz MW, Escobar GJ, Wi S,
Liljestrand P , McCulloch C, Newman TB.
Risk factors for severe hyperbilirubine-
mia among infants with borderline bili-
rubin levels: a nested case-control
study. J Pediatr. 2008;153(2):
234–240
26. Maisels MJ, Deridder JM, Kring EA,
Balasubramaniam M. Routine transcu-
taneous bilirubin measurements com-
bined with clinical risk factors
improve the prediction of subsequent
hyperbilirubinemia.J Perinatol.
2009;29(9):612–617
27. Bhavaraju VL, Guzek A, St Angelo R,
Drachman D. Evaluating nursery photo-
therapy use and discharge practices
after the creation of a weekend
newborn clinic. Hosp Pediatr. 2016;
6(7):420–425
28. Fawaz R, Baumann U, Ekong U, et al.
Guideline for the evaluation of chole-
static jaundice in infants: joint recom-
mendations of the North American
Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition and the Euro-
pean Society for Pediatric Gastroenter-
ology, Hepatology, and Nutrition.
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.2017;
64(1):154–168
29. Noorulla F, Dedon R, Maisels MJ.
Association of early direct bilirubin
levels and biliary atresia among
neonates. JAMA Netw Open.
2019;2(10):e1913321
30. Wang KS; Section on Surgery;
Committee on Fetus and Newborn;
Childhood Liver Disease Research
Network. Newborn screening for
12

biliary atresia. Pediatrics. 2015;
136(6):e1663 –e1669
31. Kuzniewicz MW, Wickremasinghe AC,
Wu YW, et al. Incidence, etiology, and
outcomes of hazardous hyperbilirubi-
nemia in newborns. Pediatrics.
2014;134(3):504–509
32. Vandborg PK, Hansen BM, Greisen G,
Mathiasen R, Kasper F, Ebbesen F.
Follow-up of extreme neonatal
hyperbilirubinaemia in 5- to 10-year-
old children: a Danish population-
based study. Dev Med Child Neurol.
2015;57(4):378–384
33. Newman TB, Wu YW, Kuzniewicz MW,
Grimes BA, McCulloch CE. Childhood
seizures after phototherapy.Pediatrics.
2018;142(4):e20180648
34. Wickremasinghe AC, Risley RJ, Kuznie-
wicz MW, et al. Risk of sensorineural
hearing loss and bilirubin exchange
transfusion thresholds.Pediatrics.
2015;136(3):505–512
35. Wu YW, Kuzniewicz MW, Wickremasinghe
AC, et al. Risk for cerebral palsy in in-
fants with total serum bilirubin levels at
or above the exchange transfusion
threshold: a population-based study.
JAMA Pediatr.2015;169(3):
239–246
36. Maimburg RD, Olsen J, Sun Y . Neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia and the risk of
febrile seizures and childhood epilepsy.
Epilepsy Res. 2016;124:67–72
37. Newman TB, Kuzniewicz MW, Liljestrand
P , Wi S, McCulloch C, Escobar GJ. Num-
bers needed to treat with photother-
apy according to American
Academy of Pediatrics guidelines.
Pediatrics. 2009;123(5):1352–1359
38. van der Schoor LWE, van Faassen
MHJR, Kema I, et al. Blue LED photo-
therapy in preterm infants: effects on
an oxidative marker of DNA damage.
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed.
2020;105(6):628–633
39. Chang PW, Waite WM. Evaluation of
home phototherapy for neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia.J Pediatr. 2020;
220:80–85
40. Pettersson M, Eriksson M, Albinsson E,
Ohlin A. Home phototherapy for hyper-
bilirubinemia in term neonates-an
unblinded multicentre randomized
controlled trial. Eur J Pediatr. 2021;
180(5):1603–1610
41. Bhutani VK; Committee on Fetus and
Newborn; AmericanAcademy of Pediat-
rics. Phototherapy to prevent severe
neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in the new-
born infant 35 or more weeks of gesta-
tion. Pediatrics.2011;128(4):e1046–e1052
42. Lamola AA. A pharmacologic view of
phototherapy.Clin Perinatol. 2016;
43(2):259–276
43. Maisels MJ, McDonagh AF. Phototherapy
for neonatal jaundice.N Engl J Med.
2008;358(9):920–928
44. Rogerson AG, Grossman ER, Gruber HS,
Boynton RC, Cuthbertson JG. 14 years
of experience with home phototherapy.
Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1986;25(6):296–299
45. Slater L, Brewer MF. Home versus
hospital phototherapy for term infants
with hyperbilirubinemia: a comparative
study. Pediatrics. 1984;73(4):515–519
46. Nkhoma ET, Poole C, Vannappagari V,
Hall SA, Beutler E. The global prevalence
of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency: a systematic review and
meta-analysis.Blood Cells Mol Dis.
2009;42(3):267–278
47. Kaplan M, Herschel M, Hammerman C,
Hoyer JD, Stevenson DK. Hyperbilirubi-
nemia among African American,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-
deficient neonates. Pediatrics. 2004;
114(2):e213–e219
48. Kaplan M, Muraca M, Vreman HJ, et al.
Neonatal bilirubin production-conjugation
imbalance: effect of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency and borderline
prematurity.Arch Dis Child Fetal Neona-
tal Ed. 2005;90(2):F123–F127
49. Watchko JF, Kaplan M, Stark AR,
Stevenson DK, Bhutani VK. Should we
screen newborns for glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
in the United States? J Perinatol.
2013;33(7):499–504
50. MacDonald MG. Hidden risks: early
discharge and bilirubin toxicity due to
glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency.Pediatrics. 1995;96(4 Pt
1):734–738
51. Kaplan M, Hammerman C, Vreman HJ,
Wong RJ, Stevenson DK. Severe hemo-
lysis with normal blood count in a
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficient neonate. J Perinatol. 2008;
28(4):306–309
52. Watchko JF. Hyperbilirubinemia in
African American neonates: clinical
issues and current challenges.Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med. 2010;15(3):176–182
53. Mukthapuram S, Dewar D, Maisels MJ.
Extreme hyperbilirubinemia and G6PD
deficiency with no laboratory evidence
of hemolysis. Clin Pediatr (Phila).
2016;55(7):686–688
54. Christensen RD, Yaish HM. Hemolytic
disorders causing severe neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia.Clin Perinatol.
2015;42(3):515–527
55. Chang PW, Kuzniewicz MW, McCulloch
CE, Newman TB. A clinical prediction
rule for rebound hyperbilirubinemia
following inpatient phototherapy.
Pediatrics. 2017;139(3):e20162896
56. Chang PW, Newman TB. A simpler
prediction rule for rebound hyperbilir-
ubinemia. Pediatrics. 2019;144(1):
e20183712
57. Grabenhenrich J, Grabenhenrich L,
B€uhrer C, Berns M. Transcutaneous bil-
irubin after phototherapy in term and
preterm infants. Pediatrics. 2014;
134(5):e1324–e1329
58. Tan KL, Dong F. Transcutaneous
bilirubinometry during and after
phototherapy. Acta Paediatr. 2003;
92(3):327–331
59. Wolf MF, Childers J, Gray KD, et al.
Exchange transfusion safety and
outcomes in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.
J Perinatol.2020;40(10):1506–1512
60. Boo NY , Lee HT. Randomized controlled
trial of oral versus intravenous fluid
supplementation on serum bilirubin
level during phototherapy of term in-
fants with severe hyperbilirubinaemia.
J Paediatr Child Health.2002;38(2):
151–155
61. Mehta S, Kumar P , Narang A.
A randomized controlled trial of fluid
supplementation in term neonates
with severe hyperbilirubinemia.J
Pediatr.2005;147(6):781–785
62. Goyal P , Mehta A, Kaur J, Jain S,
Guglani V, Chawla D. Fluid supplemen-
tation in management of neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia: a randomized
controlled trial. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med. 2018;31(20):2678–2684
63. Lai NM, Ahmad Kamar A, Choo YM,
Kong JY , Ngim CF. Fluid supplementation
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 13

for neonatal unconjugated hyperbiliru-
binaemia.Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017;8(8):CD011891
64. Hansen TW, Nietsch L, Norman E, et al.
Reversibility of acute intermediate
phase bilirubin encephalopathy.Acta
Paediatr.2009;98(10):1689–1694
65. Harris MC, Bernbaum JC, Polin JR,
Zimmerman R, Polin RA. Developmental
follow-up of breastfed term and
near-term infants with marked hyper-
bilirubinemia.Pediatrics. 2001;107(5):
1075–1080
66. Alpay F, Sarici SU, Okutan V, Erdem G,
Ozcan O, G€okc ¸ay E. High-dose intrave-
nous immunoglobulin therapy in
neonatal immune haemolytic jaundice.
Acta Paediatr. 1999;88(2):
216–219
67. Da/C21go/C21glu T, Ovali F , Samanci N, Bengisu E.
High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin
therapy for rhesus haemolytic disease.
JI n tM e dR e s .1995;23(4):
264–271
68. Elalfy MS, Elbarbary NS, Abaza HW.
Early intravenous immunoglobin
(two-dose regimen) in the management
of severe Rh hemolytic disease of new-
born–a prospective randomized con-
trolled trial. Eur J Pediatr. 2011;
170(4):461–46
69. Miqdad AM, Abdelbasit OB, Shaheed
MM, Seidahmed MZ, Abomelha AM,
Arcala OP . Intravenous immunoglobulin
G (IVIG) therapy for significant hyperbi-
lirubinemia in ABO hemolytic disease
of the newborn. J Matern Fetal Neona-
tal Med. 2004;16(3):163–166
70. R€ubo J, Albrecht K, Lasch P , et al.
High-dose intravenous immune
globulin therapy for hyperbilirubinemia
caused by Rh hemolytic disease.
J Pediatr. 1992;121(1):93–97
71. Santos MC, S/C19aC ,G o m e sS CJ r ,
Camacho LA, Moreira ME. The efficacy
of the use of intravenous human
immunoglobulin in Brazilian newborns
with rhesus hemolytic disease: a ran-
domized double-blind trial.
Transfusion.2013;53(4):777–782
72. Smits-Wintjens VE, Walther FJ, Rath ME,
et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin in
neonates with rhesus hemolytic
disease: a randomized controlled trial.
Pediatrics. 2011;127(4):680–686
73. Tanyer G, Siklar Z, Dallar Y , Yildirmak Y ,
Tiras ¸ U. Multiple dose IVIG treatment in
neonatal immune hemolytic jaundice. J
Trop Pediatr.2001;
47(1):50–53
74. Walsh S, Molloy EJ. Towards evidence
based medicine for paediatricians. Is
intravenous immunoglobulin superior
to exchange transfusion in the man-
agement of hyperbilirubinaemia in
term neonates? Arch Dis Child. 2009;
94(9):739–741
75. Zwiers C, Scheffer-Rath ME, Lopriore E,
de Haas M, Liley HG. Immunoglobulin
for alloimmune hemolytic disease in
neonates. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2018;3(3):CD003313
76. Patra K, Storfer-Isser A, Siner B, Moore
J, Hack M. Adverse events associated
with neonatal exchange transfusion in
the 1990s.J Pediatr.2004;144(5):626–631
77. Jackson JC. Adverse events associated
with exchange transfusion in healthy
and ill newborns. Pediatrics.
1997;99(5):E7
78. Behjati S, Sagheb S, Aryasepehr S,
Yaghmai B. Adverse events associated
with neonatal exchange transfusion
for hyperbilirubinemia.Indian J
Pediatr.2009;76(1):83–85
79. Chen HN, Lee ML, Tsao L Y . Exchange
transfusion using peripheral vessels is
safe and effective in newborn infants.
Pediatrics. 2008;122(4):e905–e910
80. Duan L, Gan S, Hu H. A single-center
experience on exchange transfusion
therapy in 123 full-term cases of
severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in
Wuhan. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med.
2021;34(3):466–472
81. Keenan WJ, Novak KK, Sutherland JM,
Bryla DA, Fetterly KL. Morbidity and
mortality associated with exchange
transfusion. Pediatrics. 1985;75(2 Pt
2):417–421
82. Steiner LA, Bizzarro MJ, Ehrenkranz RA,
Gallagher PG. A decline in the frequency
of neonatal exchange transfusions and its
effect on exchange-related morbidity and
mortality.Pediatrics.2007;120(1):27–32
83. Newman TB, Liljestrand P , Jeremy RJ,
et al; Jaundice and Infant Feeding
Study Team. Outcomes among new-
borns with total serum bilirubin levels
of 25 mg per deciliter or more. NE n g l
JM e d .2006;354(18):1889–1900
84. Vandborg PK, Hansen BM, Greisen G,
Mathiasen R, Kasper F, Ebbesen F.
Follow-up of extreme neonatal
hyperbilirubinaemia in 5- to 10-year-
old children: a Danish population-
based study. Dev Med Child Neurol.
2015;57(4):378–384
85. Slusher TM, Zamora TG, Appiah D,
et al. Burden of severe neonatal
jaundice: a systematic review and
meta-analysis.BMJ Paediatr Open.
2017;1(1):e000105
86. Newman TB, Maisels MJ. Less aggressive
treatment of neonatal jaundice and re-
ports of kernicterus: lessons about prac-
tice guidelines.Pediatrics.2000;105(1 Pt
3):242–245
87. Bhutani VK, Johnson L, Sivieri EM. Pre-
dictive ability of a predischarge hour-
specific serum bilirubin for subse-
quent significant hyperbilirubinemia in
healthy term and near-term newborns.
Pediatrics. 1999;103(1):6–14
88. Kaur S, Chawla D, Pathak U, Jain S.
Predischarge non-invasive risk assess-
ment for prediction of significant
hyperbilirubinemia in term and late
preterm neonates. J Perinatol. 2012;
32(9):716–721
89. Varvarigou A, Fouzas S, Skylogianni E,
Mantagou L, Bougioukou D, Mantagos
S. Transcutaneous bilirubin nomogram
for prediction of significant neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia.Pediatrics.
2009;124(4):1052–1059
90. Kaplan M, Bromiker R, Schimmel MS,
Algur N, Hammerman C. Evaluation of
discharge management in the predic-
tion of hyperbilirubinemia: the Jerusa-
lem experience. J Pediatr.
2007;150(4):412–417
91. Kuzniewicz MW, Li, SW, McCulloch CE,
Newman TB. Predicting the need for
phototherapy after discharge: update
for 2022 phototherapy guidelines. Pedi-
atrics. 2022;150(3):e2022058020
92. Wennberg RP , Watchko JF, Shapiro SM.
Maternal empowerment - an underuti-
lized strategy to prevent kernicterus?
Curr Pediatr Rev. 2017;13(3):210–219
APPENDIX C. PHOTOTHERAPY AND
EXCHANGE TRANSFUSION THRESHOLDS
The 2004 AAP guideline did not
make specific recommendations for
14

phototherapy or exchange
transfusion by week of gestational
age.1 Rather, gestational age
dichotomized at 38 weeks was
an important, separate
hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity
risk factor that led to more
aggressive treatment. In the current
guideline, the new phototherapy
threshold for infants born at
40 weeks ’ gestational age and no
recognized hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factors was set at
2 mg/dL higher than the previous
guideline’s recommendations for
infants at lower risk ($38 weeks’
gestation with no hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factors). For infants
born at 35 weeks’ gestational age with
no recognized hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factors, the new
t h r e s h o l dw a ss e ta t1m g / d Lh i g h e r
than “medium-risk” infants in the
2004 guideline (either gestational age
35 to <38 weeks or presence of
hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk
factors but not both). The new
thresholds for infants born at 36 to
39 weeks’ gestational age with no
hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk
factors were evenly spaced between the
thresholds for infants with gestational
ages of 35 weeks and 40 weeks.
A similar process was used for the
phototherapy thresholds for infants
with at least 1 hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factor. In this
case, the new phototherapy
threshold for infants with a
gestational age of 35 weeks was set
to 1 mg/dL above the 2004
threshold for infants at higher risk
(both gestational age <38 weeks
and hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factors), and for
infants born at gestational age of
$38 weeks with at least 1
hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity
risk factor, the new threshold was
set to 1 mg/dL above the threshold
for infants at medium risk (defined
above), and infants born at
gestational age of 36 or 37 weeks
were evenly spaced out between
these 2 curves.
In addition to the change above, the
new guideline takes into account the
chronologic (ie, postmenstrual) age
of the infant by increasing the
phototherapy threshold. For
example, by 7 days after birth, the
phototherapy threshold for infants
born at 39 weeks ’ gestation far
reaches that for infants born at
40 weeks ’ gestation.
The exchange transfusion thresholds
were developed by determining the
difference between the exchange
transfusion and phototherapy threshold
for each group from the 2004 guideline
and adding that difference to the new
phototherapy thresholds in the current
guideline.
The following tables list the specific
thresholds for phototherapy and
exchange transfusion shown in
Figs 2, 3, 6, and 7. Each set of tables
is followed by figures that illustrate
the thresholds from birth to 72
hours and then from 72 hours (ie,
3 days) to 336 hours (ie, 14 days).
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 15

6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 66 72
Age (hours)
Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Gestational Age
≥ 40 Weeks
39 Weeks
38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks
Phototherapy Thresholds:  No Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
14
16
18
20
22
24
3 4                 5                  6                 7                  8                 9                10                11               12                13               14
Age (days)
Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Gestational Age
≥ 40 Weeks
39 Weeks
38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks
Phototherapy Thresholds:  No Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
A
B
SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE 1
A, Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than
gestational age from birth to 72 hours (ie, 3 days). B, Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with no recognized hyperbilir-
ubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational age from 3 to 14 days. This is an enlarged version ofFig 2. These thresholds are based on expert
opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of phototherapy exceed its potential harms. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations;
do not subtract direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-react-
ing or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Note that infants<24 hours old with a TSB at or above the phototherapy threshold
are likely to have a hemolytic process and should be evaluated for hemolytic disease as described in recommendation 14. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity
risk factors include gestational age<38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency,
or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours.
16

4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 66 72
Age (hours)
Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Gestational Age
≥ 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks
Phototherapy Thresholds:  1 or More Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
14
16
18
20
3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3                1 4
Age (days)
Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Gestational Age
≥ 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks
Phototherapy Thresholds:  1 or More Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
A
B
SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE 2
A, Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with any recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors otherthan
gestational age from birth to 72 hours (ie, 3 days). B, Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with any recognized hyperbi-
lirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational age from 3 to 14 days. This is an enlarged version ofFig 3. These thresholds are based on ex-
pert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of phototherapy exceed its potential harms. Use total serum bilirubin
concentrations; do not subtract the direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in
which the direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors includeg e s t a -
tional age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic condi-
tions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours.
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 17

14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
0 12 24 36 48 60                               72
Age (hours)
Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Gestational Age
≥ 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks
Exchange Transfusion Thresholds:  No Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
22
24
26
28
3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3                1 4
Age (days)
Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Gestational Age
≥ 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks
Exchange Transfusion Thresholds: No Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
A
B
SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE 3
A, Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational
age from birth to 72 hours (ie, 3 days). B, Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxic-
ity risk factors other than gestational age from 3 to 14 days. This is an enlarged version ofFig 5. See Fig 4, which describes escalation of care. These thresh-
olds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of escalation of care exceed its potential harms. The stippled
lines for the first 24 hours indicate uncertainty because of the wide range of clinical circumstances and responses to intensive phototherapy. Use total se-
rum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract direct bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-
reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age<38
weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or
any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours.
18

12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0 12 24 36 48 60                                72
Age (hours)
Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Gestational Age
≥ 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks
Exchange Transfusion Thresholds:  One or More Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
20
22
24
3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3                1 4
Age (days)
Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Gestational Age
≥ 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks
Exchange Transfusion Thresholds:  One or More Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
A
B
SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE 4
A, Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with any recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational
age, from birth to 72 hours (ie, 3 days). B, Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with any recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotox-
icity risk factors other than gestational age from 3 to 14 days. This is an enlarged version ofFig 6. See Fig 4, which describes escalation of care. These
thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of escalation of care exceed its potential harms. The
stippled lines for the first 24 hours indicate uncertainty because of the wide range of clinical circumstances and responses to intensive phototherapy. Use
total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract direct bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the
direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38
weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic conditions, sepsis; or
any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours. B, Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with any recognized hyperbiliru-
binemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational age from 3 to 14 days.
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 19

SUPPLEMENTAL TABLE 1 Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational age. These thresholds, also provided in Fig 2, are based on expert
opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential bene ﬁts of phototherapy exceed its potential harms. Use the
total serum bilirubin concentration. Do not subtract direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum
bilirubin. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune
hemolytic disease, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) de ﬁciency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any
signiﬁcant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours.
Gestational age of 40 weeks or more and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
0 123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.6 9.8 10.0 10.2 10.4 10.5 10.7 10.9 11.1 11.3 11.5 11.7 11.9 12.1 12.2 12.4 12.6 12.8 13.0 13.1
1 13.3 13.5 13.6 13.8 14.0 14.1 14.3 14.5 14.6 14.8 15.0 15.1 15.3 15.4 15.6 15.7 15.9 16.0 16.2 16.3 16.4 16.6 16.7 16.9
2 17.0 17.1 17.3 17.4 17.5 17.7 17.8 17.9 18.0 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.6 18.8 18.9 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.3 19.4 19.6 19.7 19.7
3 19.8 19.9 20.0 20.1 20.2 20.3 20.4 20.5 20.6 20.7 20.7 20.8 20.9 21.0 21.1 21.1 21.2 21.3 21.4 21.4 21.5 21.6 21.6 21.7
4 21.8 a 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8
aThe threshold $96 h (eg, 4 completed days) after birth is 21.8 mg/dL.
Gestational age of 38 weeks and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7 10.8 11.0 11.2 11.4 11.6 11.7 11.9 12.1
1 12.3 12.4 12.6 12.8 12.9 13.1 13.3 13.4 13.6 13.8 13.9 14.1 14.2 14.4 14.5 14.7 14.8 15.0 15.1 15.3 15.4 15.6 15.7 15.8
2 16.0 16.1 16.2 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.8 16.9 17.0 17.1 17.3 17.4 17.5 17.6 17.7 17.8 17.9 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.6 18.7
3 18.8 18.9 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.3 19.4 19.5 19.5 19.6 19.7 19.8 19.9 20.0 20.0 20.1 20.2 20.3 20.3 20.4 20.5 20.6 20.6 20.7
4 20.7 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9
5 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0
6 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1
7 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2
8 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3
9 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4
10 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5
11 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6
12 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7
13 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.8 a 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8
aThe threshold $325 h (eg, 13 completed days and 13 h) after birth is 21.8 mg/dL.
Gestational age of 39 weeks and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
0123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 8.4 8.6 8.8 9.0 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.0 10.2 10.4 10.6 10.8 11.0 11.2 11.4 11.6 11.8 11.9 12.1 12.3 12.5 12.7
1 12.8 13.0 13.2 13.3 13.5 13.7 13.8 14.0 14.2 14.3 14.5 14.7 14.8 15.0 15.1 15.3 15.4 15.6 15.7 15.9 16.0 16.2 16.3 16.4
2 16.6 16.7 16.8 17.0 17.1 17.2 17.4 17.5 17.6 17.8 17.9 18.0 18.1 18.2 18.4 18.5 18.6 18.7 18.8 18.9 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.3
3 19.5 19.6 19.7 19.7 19.8 19.9 20.0 20.1 20.2 20.3 20.4 20.5 20.6 20.6 20.7 20.8 20.9 21.0 21.0 21.1 21.2 21.3 21.3 21.4
4 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6
5 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7
6 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.8 a 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8
aThe threshold $157 h (eg, 6 completed days and 13 h) after birth is 21.8 mg/dL.
20

Gestational age of 37 weeks and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8 9.0 9.2 9.4 9.6 9.8 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7 10.8 11.0 11.2 11.4 11.5
1 11.7 11.9 12.1 12.2 12.4 12.5 12.7 12.9 13.0 13.2 13.3 13.5 13.6 13.8 13.9 14.1 14.2 14.4 14.5 14.7 14.8 15.0 15.1 15.2
2 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.8 15.9 16.0 16.1 16.3 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.7 16.9 17.0 17.1 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.5 17.6 17.7 17.8 17.9 18.0
3 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.6 18.7 18.8 18.9 19.0 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.3 19.4 19.4 19.5 19.6 19.7 19.7 19.8 19.9 19.9 20.0
4 20.0 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1
5 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.3
6 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.4 20.4
7 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.5 20.5 20.5
8 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.5 20.6 20.6 20.6
9 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7
10 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.7 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8
11 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9
12 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 20.9 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0
13 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1
14 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1
Gestational age of 36 weeks and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.8 9.0 9.2 9.4 9.6 9.8 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.6 10.8 11.0
1 11.2 11.3 11.5 11.7 11.8 12.0 12.1 12.3 12.5 12.6 12.8 12.9 13.1 13.2 13.4 13.5 13.7 13.8 13.9 14.1 14.2 14.4 14.5 14.6
2 14.8 14.9 15.0 15.1 15.3 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.8 15.9 16.0 16.1 16.2 16.3 16.5 16.6 16.7 16.8 16.9 17.0 17.1 17.2 17.3 17.4
3 17.5 17.6 17.7 17.8 17.9 17.9 18.0 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.4 18.5 18.6 18.7 18.8 18.8 18.9 19.0 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.2 19.3
4 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4
5 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5
6 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6
7 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7 19.7
8 19.7 19.7 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8
9 19.8 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9
10 19.9 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0
11 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1 20.1
12 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2 20.2
13 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.4 20.4
14 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4 20.4
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 21

Gestational age of 35 weeks and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
01 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.0 9.2 9.4 9.6 9.8 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.4
1 10.6 10.8 10.9 11.1 11.3 11.4 11.6 11.7 11.9 12.0 12.2 12.3 12.5 12.6 12.8 12.9 13.1 13.2 13.4 13.5 13.6 13.8 13.9 14.0
2 14.2 14.3 14.4 14.5 14.7 14.8 14.9 15.0 15.1 15.3 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.7 15.8 15.9 16.0 16.1 16.2 16.3 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.7
3 16.8 16.9 17.0 17.1 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.5 17.5 17.6 17.7 17.8 17.8 17.9 18.0 18.1 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.5 18.6
4 18.6 18.6 18.6 18.6 18.6 18.6 18.6 18.6 18.6 18.6 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7
5 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.7 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8
6 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.8 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9
7 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 18.9 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0
8 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1
9 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.1 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2
10 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.2 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3
11 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.3 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4
12 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.4 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5
13 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.5 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6
14 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.6
SUPPLEMENTAL TABLE 2 Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with a recognized hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factor. These thresholds, also provided in Fig 3, are based on expert opinion rather than strong
evidence on when the potential bene ﬁts of phototherapy exceed its potential harms. Use the total serum bilirubin
concentration. Do not subtract direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. Hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) de ﬁciency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any signi ﬁcant clinical instability
in the previous 24 hours.
Gestational age of 38 weeks or more and a hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
0 12 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.6 8.8 9.0 9.2 9.4 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.0 10.2 10.4
1 10.5 10.7 10.8 11.0 11.2 11.3 11.5 11.6 11.8 11.9 12.1 12.2 12.4 12.5 12.7 12.8 12.9 13.1 13.2 13.3 13.5 13.6 13.7 13.9
2 14.0 14.1 14.2 14.4 14.5 14.6 14.7 14.8 14.9 15.1 15.2 15.3 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.7 15.8 15.9 16.0 16.1 16.2 16.3 16.4 16.5
3 16.6 16.6 16.7 16.8 16.9 17.0 17.1 17.1 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.4 17.5 17.6 17.6 17.7 17.8 17.8 17.9 18.0 18.0 18.1 18.1 18.2
4 18.2 a 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2
aThe threshold $96 h (eg, 4 completed days) after birth is 18.2 mg/dL.
Gestational age of 37 and an additional hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 34567 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.0 9.2 9.4 9.5 9.7 9.9
1 10.0 10.2 10.4 10.5 10.7 10.8 11.0 11.1 11.3 11.4 11.6 11.7 11.9 12.0 12.2 12.3 12.4 12.6 12.7 12.9 13.0 13.1 13.2 13.4
2 13.5 13.6 13.8 13.9 14.0 14.1 14.2 14.4 14.5 14.6 14.7 14.8 14.9 15.0 15.1 15.2 15.3 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.7 15.8 15.9 16.0
3 16.1 16.2 16.3 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.6 16.7 16.8 16.9 17.0 17.0 17.1 17.2 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.4 17.5 17.6 17.6 17.7 17.8 17.8
4 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0
5 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1
6 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.2 a 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2
aThe threshold $151 h (eg, 6 completed days and 7 h) after birth is 18.2 mg/dL.
22

Gestational age of 36 and an additional hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.6 8.8 9.0 9.1 9.3
1 9.4 9.6 9.8 9.9 10.1 10.2 10.4 10.5 10.7 10.8 11.0 11.1 11.2 11.4 11.5 11.7 11.8 11.9 12.1 12.2 12.3 12.5 12.6 12.7
2 12.8 13.0 13.1 13.2 13.3 13.4 13.5 13.7 13.8 13.9 14.0 14.1 14.2 14.3 14.4 14.5 14.6 14.7 14.8 14.9 15.0 15.1 15.2 15.3
3 15.4 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.7 15.8 15.8 15.9 16.0 16.1 16.1 16.2 16.3 16.4 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.6 16.7 16.7 16.8 16.8 16.9 17.0
4 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1
5 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.3
6 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4
7 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5
8 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6
9 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.6 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7 17.7
10 17.7 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9
11 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0
12 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1
13 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.1 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2
14 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2 18.2
Gestational age of 35 and an additional hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.7
1 8.9 9.0 9.2 9.3 9.5 9.6 9.8 9.9 10.1 10.2 10.3 10.5 10.6 10.8 10.9 11.0 11.2 11.3 11.4 11.5 11.7 11.8 11.9 12.0
2 12.2 12.3 12.4 12.5 12.6 12.7 12.8 13.0 13.1 13.2 13.3 13.4 13.5 13.6 13.7 13.8 13.9 14.0 14.1 14.2 14.2 14.3 14.4 14.5
3 14.6 14.7 14.8 14.8 14.9 15.0 15.1 15.1 15.2 15.3 15.3 15.4 15.5 15.5 15.6 15.7 15.7 15.8 15.8 15.9 15.9 16.0 16.1 16.1
4 16.1 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.2 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3
5 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.3 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4
6 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5
7 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.5 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6
8 16.6 16.6 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.8 16.8 16.8
9 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9
10 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0
11 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1
12 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.1 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.3
13 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4
14 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4 17.4
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 23

SUPPLEMENTAL TABLE 3 Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk
factors other than gestational age. These thresholds, also provided in Fig 6, are based on expert opinion rather than
strong evidence on when the potential bene ﬁts of exchange transfusion exceed its potential harms. Use the total serum
bilirubin concentration. Do not subtract direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin.
Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune
hemolytic disease, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) de ﬁciency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any
signiﬁcant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours.
Gestational age of 38 weeks or more and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
0 12 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 18.0 18.2 18.4 18.5 18.7 18.8 19.0 19.1 19.3 19.4 19.6 19.7 19.9 20.0 20.1 20.3 20.4 20.6 20.7 20.8 21.0 21.1 21.2
1 21.4 21.5 21.6 21.7 21.9 22.0 22.1 22.2 22.3 22.4 22.6 22.7 22.8 22.9 23.0 23.1 23.2 23.3 23.4 23.5 23.6 23.7 23.8 23.9
2 24.0 24.1 24.2 24.3 24.4 24.5 24.6 24.7 24.7 24.8 24.9 25.0 25.1 25.2 25.2 25.3 25.4 25.5 25.5 25.6 25.7 25.7 25.8 25.9
3 25.9 26.0 26.0 26.1 26.2 26.2 26.3 26.3 26.4 26.4 26.5 26.5 26.6 26.6 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.8 26.8 26.9 26.9 26.9 27.0 27.0
4 27.0 a 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0
aThe threshold $96 h (eg, 4 completed days) after birth is 27 mg/dL.
Gestational age of 37 weeks and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor other than gestational age. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 17.0 17.1 17.3 17.5 17.6 17.8 17.9 18.1 18.2 18.4 18.5 18.7 18.8 18.9 19.1 19.2 19.4 19.5 19.6 19.8 19.9 20.1 20.2
1 20.3 20.5 20.6 20.7 20.8 21.0 21.1 21.2 21.3 21.5 21.6 21.7 21.8 21.9 22.1 22.2 22.3 22.4 22.5 22.6 22.7 22.8 22.9 23.0
2 23.1 23.2 23.3 23.4 23.5 23.6 23.7 23.8 23.9 24.0 24.1 24.2 24.3 24.4 24.5 24.5 24.6 24.7 24.8 24.9 24.9 25.0 25.1 25.2
3 25.2 25.3 25.4 25.5 25.5 25.6 25.7 25.7 25.8 25.8 25.9 26.0 26.0 26.1 26.1 26.2 26.2 26.3 26.3 26.4 26.4 26.5 26.5 26.5
4 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7
5 26.7 26.7 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9
6 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 27.0 a 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0
aThe threshold $151 h (eg, 6 completed days and 10 h) after birth is 27.0 mg/dL.
Gestational age of 36 weeks and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor other than gestational age. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
0 15.9 16.1 16.2 16.4 16.5 16.7 16.8 16.9 17.1 17.2 17.4 17.5 17.7 17.8 17.9 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.5 18.6 18.7 18.9 19.0
1 19.1 19.2 19.4 19.5 19.6 19.7 19.9 20.0 20.1 20.2 20.4 20.5 20.6 20.7 20.8 20.9 21.0 21.2 21.3 21.4 21.5 21.6 21.7 21.8
2 21.9 22.0 22.1 22.2 22.3 22.4 22.5 22.6 22.7 22.8 22.9 23.0 23.1 23.2 23.2 23.3 23.4 23.5 23.6 23.7 23.8 23.8 23.9 24.0
3 24.1 24.1 24.2 24.3 24.4 24.4 24.5 24.6 24.6 24.7 24.8 24.8 24.9 25.0 25.0 25.1 25.2 25.2 25.3 25.3 25.4 25.4 25.5 25.5
4 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7
5 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9
6 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1
7 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2
8 26.2 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4
9 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.4 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5 26.5
10 26.5 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.6 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7
11 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8
12 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.8 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9
13 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0
14 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0
24

Gestational age of 35 weeks and no hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor other than gestational age. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 14.9 15.0 15.1 15.3 15.4 15.6 15.7 15.8 16.0 16.1 16.2 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.8 16.9 17.0 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.5 17.7 17.8
1 17.9 18.0 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.7 18.8 18.9 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.4 19.5 19.6 19.7 19.8 19.9 20.0 20.1 20.2 20.3 20.5 20.6
2 20.7 20.8 20.9 21.0 21.1 21.2 21.3 21.4 21.5 21.6 21.7 21.7 21.8 21.9 22.0 22.1 22.2 22.3 22.4 22.5 22.6 22.6 22.7 22.8
3 22.9 23.0 23.1 23.1 23.2 23.3 23.4 23.4 23.5 23.6 23.7 23.7 23.8 23.9 23.9 24.0 24.1 24.1 24.2 24.3 24.3 24.4 24.4 24.5
4 24.5 24.5 24.5 24.5 24.5 24.5 24.5 24.5 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.7 24.7 24.7 24.7 24.7
5 24.7 24.7 24.7 24.7 24.7 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.8 24.9 24.9 24.9 24.9 24.9 24.9 24.9 24.9
6 24.9 24.9 24.9 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.1 25.1 25.1 25.1 25.1 25.1 25.1 25.1 25.1
7 25.1 25.1 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.3
8 25.3 25.3 25.3 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.4 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.5
9 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.5 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.6 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7
10 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.7 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.8 25.9 25.9 25.9
11 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 25.9 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.0
12 26.0 26.0 26.0 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.1 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2
13 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.2 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3
14 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3 26.3
SUPPLEMENTAL TABLE 4 Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with any recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk
factors other than gestational age. These thresholds, also provided in Fig 7, are based on expert opinion rather than
strong evidence on when the potential bene ﬁts of exchange transfusion exceed its potential harms. Use the total serum
bilirubin concentration. Do not subtract direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin.
Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune
hemolytic disease, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) de ﬁciency, or other hemolytic conditions, sepsis; or any
signiﬁcant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours.
Gestational age of 38 weeks or more and any hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 14.8 15.0 15.1 15.2 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.8 15.9 16.0 16.1 16.3 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.7 16.9 17.0 17.1 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.6
1 17.7 17.8 17.9 18.0 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.7 18.8 18.9 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.3 19.4 19.5 19.6 19.7 19.8 19.9 19.9 20.0
2 20.1 20.2 20.3 20.4 20.5 20.6 20.7 20.8 20.8 20.9 21.0 21.1 21.2 21.3 21.3 21.4 21.5 21.6 21.7 21.7 21.8 21.9 22.0 22.0
3 22.1 22.2 22.2 22.3 22.4 22.5 22.5 22.6 22.7 22.7 22.8 22.8 22.9 23.0 23.0 23.1 23.1 23.2 23.3 23.3 23.4 23.4 23.5 23.5
4 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
6 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
7 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
8 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
9 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
10 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
11 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
12 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
13 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
14 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 25

Gestational age of 37 weeks and any additional hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 14.3 14.4 14.6 14.7 14.8 15.0 15.1 15.2 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.7 15.9 16.0 16.1 16.2 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.7 16.8 17.0 17.1
1 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.5 17.7 17.8 17.9 18.0 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.6 18.7 18.8 18.9 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.3 19.4 19.5 19.6
2 19.7 19.8 19.9 20.0 20.1 20.1 20.2 20.3 20.4 20.5 20.6 20.7 20.7 20.8 20.9 21.0 21.1 21.1 21.2 21.3 21.4 21.4 21.5 21.6
3 21.7 21.7 21.8 21.9 21.9 22.0 22.1 22.1 22.2 22.3 22.3 22.4 22.5 22.5 22.6 22.6 22.7 22.8 22.8 22.9 22.9 23.0 23.0 23.1
4 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2
5 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.4 23.4 23.4
6 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
7 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
8 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
9 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
10 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
11 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
12 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
13 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
14 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
Gestational age of 36 weeks and any additional hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 13.7 13.9 14.0 14.1 14.3 14.4 14.5 14.7 14.8 14.9 15.1 15.2 15.3 15.4 15.6 15.7 15.8 15.9 16.1 16.2 16.3 16.4 16.5
1 16.6 16.8 16.9 17.0 17.1 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.5 17.6 17.7 17.8 17.9 18.0 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.6 18.7 18.8 18.9 19.0
2 19.1 19.2 19.2 19.3 19.4 19.5 19.6 19.7 19.7 19.8 19.9 20.0 20.1 20.1 20.2 20.3 20.3 20.4 20.5 20.6 20.6 20.7 20.8 20.8
3 20.9 20.9 21.0 21.1 21.1 21.2 21.2 21.3 21.4 21.4 21.5 21.5 21.6 21.6 21.7 21.7 21.8 21.8 21.9 21.9 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.1
4 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.3 22.3
5 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4
6 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6
7 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8
8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9
9 22.9 22.9 22.9 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.1 23.1 23.1
10 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.1 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2
11 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.2 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3
12 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4
13 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.4 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
14 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5 23.5
Gestational age of 35 weeks and any additional hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor. The threshold is TSB in mg/dL.
Day
Hour on Completed Day
012 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
0 13.1 13.3 13.4 13.6 13.7 13.8 14.0 14.1 14.3 14.4 14.5 14.6 14.8 14.9 15.0 15.1 15.3 15.4 15.5 15.6 15.8 15.9 16.0
1 16.1 16.2 16.3 16.4 16.5 16.6 16.8 16.9 17.0 17.1 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.5 17.6 17.7 17.7 17.8 17.9 18.0 18.1 18.2 18.3 18.4
2 18.5 18.5 18.6 18.7 18.8 18.9 18.9 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.2 19.3 19.4 19.4 19.5 19.6 19.6 19.7 19.8 19.8 19.9 19.9 20.0 20.1
3 20.1 20.2 20.2 20.3 20.3 20.4 20.4 20.5 20.5 20.6 20.6 20.6 20.7 20.7 20.8 20.8 20.8 20.9 20.9 20.9 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.1
4 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.2 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3
5 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.3 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.4 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5
6 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.6 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.7
7 21.7 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.9 21.9 21.9 21.9 21.9 21.9 21.9 21.9 21.9 21.9 21.9
8 21.9 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1 22.1
9 22.1 22.1 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.2 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3
10 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.3 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.4 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5
11 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.6
12 22.6 22.6 22.6 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8
13 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9
14 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9 22.9
26

Reference for Phototherapy and
Exchange Transfusion Thresholds
REFERENCES
1. Maisels MJ, Baltz RD, Bhutani VK, et al;
American Academy of Pediatrics
Subcommittee on Hyperbilirubinemia.
Management of hyperbilirubinemia in
the newborn infant 35 or more weeks
of gestation. Pediatrics. 2004;114(1):
297–316
PEDIATRICS Volume 150, number 3, September 2022 27