URL: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg98/evidence/full-guideline-pdf-245411821
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

National Collaborating Centre for
Women’s and Children’s Health
Neonatal jaundice
Clinical Guideline
May 2010
Funded to produce guidelines for the NHS by NICE
RCOG
Press
2009RCOG Press
Obstetricians and 
College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists. For a complete 
list of RCOG Press titles, visit: 
ww.rcogbookshop.com
When to suspect child maltreatment
Neonatal jaundice
Clinical Guideline July 2009 When to suspect child maltreatment
Other NICE guidelines produced by the National Collaborating Centre for
Women’s and Children’s Health include:
• Antenatal care: routine care for the healthy pregnant woman
• Fertility: assessment and treatment for people with fertility problems
• Caesarean section
• Type 1 diabetes: diagnosis and management of type 1 diabetes in children
and young people
• Long-acting reversible contraception: the effective and appropriate use of
long-acting reversible contraception
• Urinary incontinence: the management of urinary incontinence in women
• Heavy menstrual bleeding
• Feverish illness in children: assessment and initial management in children
younger than 5 years
• Urinary tract infection in children: diagnosis, treatment and long-term
management
• Intrapartum care: care of healthy women and their babies during childbirth
• Atopic eczema in children: management of atopic eczema in children from
birth up to the age of 12 years
• Surgical management of otitis media with effusion in children
Guidelines in production include:
• Surgical site infection: prevention and treatment of surgical site infection
• Hypertensive disorders in pregnancy
• Neonatal jaundice
• Constipation in children
• Bacterial meningitis and meningococcal septicaemia in children 
• Pregnant women with complex social factors
• Autism in children and adolescents 
• Multiple pregnancy
Enquiries regarding the above guidelines can be addressed to:
National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health
King’s Court
Fourth Floor
2–16 Goodge Street
London
W1T 2QA
enquiries@ncc-wch.org.uk
A version of this guideline for parents and carers is available from the NICE website
(www.nice.org.uk/CG089) or from NICE publications on 0845 003 7783; quote
reference number N1901.
• Diabetes in pregnancy: management of diabetes and its commplications from
preconception to the postnatal period
• Induction of labour
• Diarrhoea and vomiting caused by gastroenteritis: diagnosis, assessment  and
management in children younger than 5 years
Published by the Royal

Update information
October 2023: We updated recommendation 1.2.5 to highlight that skin pigmentation 
changes may be harder to see in darker skin, and recommendation 1.7.1 to advise that urine 
culture should only be considered if there is clinical suspicion of urinary tract infection. For 
more information, see the October 2023 surveillance report.
March 2023: We added a safety statement about using bilirubin thresholds to the threshold 
tables and to section 1.3 on how to manage hyperbilirubinaemia.
October 2016: Recommendation 1.4.9 was amended to clarify when intensified 
phototherapy should be used in relation to time since birth.
These changes can be seen in the short version of the guideline at:
http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG98

 
 
Neonatal jaundice 
 
 
 
National Collaborating Centre for Women’s 
and Children’s Health 
 
Commissioned by the National Institute for 
Health and Clinical Excellence 
 
 
 
 
May 2010 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
Published by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 27 Sussex Place, Regent’s Park, London 
NW1 4RG 
 
www.rcog.org.uk 
 
Registered charity no. 213280 
 
First published 2010 
 
© 2010 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
 
 
 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form or by any means, without 
the prior written permission of the publisher or, in the case of reprographic reproduction, in accordance with 
the terms of licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK [www.cla.co.uk ]. Enquiries 
concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should be sent to the publisher at the UK address 
printed on this page. 
 
The use of registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a 
specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant laws and regulations and therefore for 
general use. 
 
While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the information contained within this 
publication, the publisher can give no guarantee for information about drug dosage and application thereof 
contained in this book. In every individual case the respective user must check current indications and 
accuracy by consulting other pharmaceutical literature  and following the guidelines laid down by the 
manufacturers of specific products and the relevant authorities in the country in which they are practising.  
 
This guideline has been fully funded by NICE. Healthcare professionals are expected to take it fully into 
account when exercising their clinical judgement. However, the guidance does not override the individual 
responsibility of healthcare professionals to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual 
patient. 
 
Implementation of this guidance is the responsibility of local commissioners and/or providers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NCC-WCH Editor: Andrew Welsh 
Original design: FiSH Books, London 
Typesetting: Andrew Welsh 
 

 
iii 
Contents 
Guideline Development Group and acknowledgements iv 
1 Guidance summary 1 
1.1 Key terms 1 
1.2 Key priorities for implementation 1 
1.3 Threshold table 3 
1.4 Summary of all recommendations 4 
1.5 Research recommendations 11 
1.6 Treatment threshold graphs 13 
1.7 Investigation, phototherapy and exchange transfusion pathways 13 
2 Introduction 33 
2.1 Neonatal jaundice 33 
2.2 Aim of the guideline 35 
2.3 Areas outside the remit of the guideline 35 
2.4 Who has developed the guideline 35 
2.5 Related NICE guidance 35 
2.6 Guideline methodology 36 
3 Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus 41 
3.1 Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia 41 
3.2 Risk factors for kernicterus and/or adverse sequelae 47 
4 Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 53 
4.1 Tests that predict hyperbilirubinaemia 54 
4.2 Tests that do not predict hyperbilirubinaemia 63 
5 Recognition 70 
5.1 Visual/clinical examination 71 
5.2 Devices for measuring bilirubin 75 
6 Formal assessment for the causes of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia 87 
6.1 Tests to detect underlying disease in all babies with hyperbilirubinaemia 88 
6.2 Formal assessment of babies with prolonged jaundice 98 
7 Treatment 100 
7.1 How to manage hyperbilirubinaemia 100 
7.2 Phototherapy 105 
7.3 Exchange transfusion 127 
7.4 Other treatments 131 
7.5 Satisfaction with treatment 140 
8 Information 142 
Appendix A Scope 145 
Appendix B Declarations of interest 149 
Appendix C Economic evaluation of alternative testing strategies in the detection of hyperbilirubinaemia 152 
Appendix D Cost-effectiveness of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 165 
Appendix E Implementation tools 169 
Appendix F Registered stakeholder organisations 172 
Appendix G Clinical questions 175 
Appendix H Evidence tables 177 
Appendix I Search strategies 319 
Appendix J Excluded studies 462 
Abbreviations, Glossary and References 495 
 

 
iv 
Guideline Development 
Group and 
acknowledgements 
Guideline Development Group members 
Christiana Aride GP, Tynemouth Medical Practice 
Jeffrey Barron* Consultant Chemical Pathologist, St Helier Hospital 
Yvonne Benjamin Community Midwife, University Hospitals Leicester NHS Trust 
Sally Cottrell* Consultant Midwife, University of the West of England 
Karen Ford Senior Lecturer, De Montfort University 
Kevin Ives Consultant Neonatologist and Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer in Paediatrics, 
Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust. 
Maria Jenkins Parent Representative 
Alison Johns Transitional Care Sister, University College Lon don Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust 
Donal Manning Consultant Paediatrician, Wirral University Teaching Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust 
Farrah Pradhan Parent Representative 
Janet Rennie Consultant and Senior Lecturer in Neonatal Medicine, Elizabeth Garrett 
Anderson Institute for Women's Health, University College  London Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust 
Debra Teasdale Head of Department – Health, Wellbeing and the Family , Canterbury Christ 
Church University 
National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health (NCC-WCH) staff 
Wahab Bello Office Administrator 
Shona Burman-Roy Senior Research Fellow (from September 2009) 
Katherine Cullen Health Economist (July–December 2009 
Hannah-Rose Douglas Health Economist 
Paul Jacklin Health Economist 
Juliet Kenny Project Manager (from January 2010) 
Rosalind Lai Information Scientist 
Hugh McGuire Research Fellow (from August 2008) 
M Stephen Murphy Clinical Co-Director Children’s Health, Senior Lecturer in Paediatrics and Child 
Health (from September 2009)  
Edmund Peston Document Supply Coordinator 
Wendy Riches Executive Director (from October 2008) 
Former members of NCC-WCH technical team 
Jay Bannerjee Clinical Co-Director (to December 2008) 
Itrat Iqbal Health Economist (to June 2009) 
Rajesh Khanna Senior Research Fellow (to April 2009) 
Carolina Ortega Work Programme Coordinator (to April 2009) 
                                                 
* Former members of GDG. 

Guideline Development Group and acknowledgements 
v 
Debbie Pledge Senior Information Scientist (to April 2009) 
Anuradha Sekhri Freelance Systematic Reviewer 
Martin Whittle Clinical Co-Director (to September 2009) 
External advisers 
None 
Acknowledgements 
The NCC-WCH and Guideline Development Group (GDG) would like to thank:  
• Dr Giles Kendall MBBS, BSc(hons), MRCPCH PhD Academic Clinical Lecturer Neonatal Medicine 
University College London / University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and T J Cole, 
Professor of Medical Statistics, MRC Centre of Epidemiology for Child Health, UCL Institute of Child 
Health for allowing the GDG to adapt their Excel spreadsheet in developing the treatment threshold graphs 
included in this guideline. 
• Tony Crowley for his work developing the BiliWheel  
• Paul Griffiths for his expert advice on clinical biochemistry. 
 
 



 
1 
1 Guidance summary 
1.1 Key terms 
Conventional phototherapy Phototherapy given using a single light source (not fibreoptic) 
that is positioned above the baby 
Direct Antiglobulin Test (DAT) Also known as the direct Coombs’ test; this test is used to 
detect antibodies or complement proteins that are bound to 
the surface of red blood cells 
Fibreoptic phototherapy Phototherapy given using a single light source that comprises a 
light generator, a fibre-optic cable through which the light is 
carried and a flexible light pad, on which the baby is placed or 
that is wrapped around the baby 
Multiple phototherapy Phototherapy that is given using more than one light source 
simultaneously; for example, two or more conventional units, 
or a combination of conventional and fibreoptic units 
Near-term 35 to 36 weeks gestational age 
Preterm Less than 37 weeks gestational age 
Prolonged jaundice Jaundice lasting more than more than 14 days in term babies 
and more than 21 days in preterm babies 
Significant hyperbilirubinaemia A n elevation of the serum bilirubin to a level requiring 
treatment 
Term 37 weeks or more gestational age 
Visible jaundice Jaundice detected by a visual inspection 
1.2 Key priorities for implementation 
Information for parents and carers  
Offer parents or carers information about neonatal jaundice that is tailored to their needs and 
expressed concerns. This information should be provided through verbal discussion backed up 
by written information. Care should be taken to avoid causing unnecessary anxiety to parents or 
carers. Information should include: 
• factors that influence the development of significant hyperbilirubinaemia  
• how to check the baby for jaundice 
• what to do if they suspect jaundice 
• the importance of recognising jaundice in the first 24 hours and of seeking urgent medical advice  
• the importance of checking the baby’s nappies for dark urine or pale chalky stools  
• the fact that neonatal jaundice is common, and reassurance that it is usually transient and 
harmless 
• reassurance that breastfeeding can usually continue. 
Care for all babies 
Identify babies as being more likely to develop significant hyperbilirubinaemia if they have any 
of the following factors: 
• gestational age under 38 weeks 
• a previous sibling with neonatal jaundice requiring phototherapy 
• mother’s intention to breastfeed exclusively 
• visible jaundice in the first 24 hours of life. 

Neonatal jaundice 
2 
In all babies:  
• check whether there are factors associated with an increased likelihood of developing 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia soon after birth  
• examine the baby for jaundice at every opportunity especially in the first 72 hours. 
When looking for jaundice (visual inspection):  
• check the naked baby in bright and preferably natural light 
• examination of the sclerae, gums and blanched skin is useful across all skin tones.  
Additional care 
Ensure b abies with factors associated with an increased likelihood of developing significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia receive an additional visual inspection by a healthcare professional during 
the first 48 hours of life. 
Measuring bilirubin in all babies with jaundice  
Do not rely on visual inspection alone to estimate the bilirubin level in a baby with jaundice.  
How to measure the bilirubin level  
When measuring the bilirubin level: 
• use a transcutaneous bilirubinometer in babies with a gestational age of 35 weeks or more 
and postnatal age of more than 24 hours 
• if a transcutaneous bilirubinometer is not available, measure the serum bilirubin  
• if a transcutaneous bilirubinometer measurement indicates a bilirubin level greater than 
250 micromol/litre check the result by measuring the serum bilirubin 
• always use serum bilirubin measurement to determine the bilirubin level in babies with 
jaundice in the first 24 hours of life 
• always use serum bilirubin measurement to determine the bilirubin level in babies less than 
35 weeks gestational age 
• a lways use serum bilirubin measurement for babies at or above the relevant treatment 
threshold for their postnatal age, and for all subsequent measurements 
• do not use an icterometer. 
How to manage hyperbilirubinaemia  
Use the bilirubin level to determine the management of hyperbilirubinaemia in all babies (see  
threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)). 
Care of babies with prolonged jaundice  
Follow expert advice about care for babies with a conjugated bilirubin level greater than 
25 micromol/litre because this may indicate serious liver disease. 

Guidance summary 
3 
1.3 Threshold table 
Consensus-based bilirubin thresholds for the management of babies of 38 weeks or more gestational 
age with hyperbilirubinaemia 
Age (hours) Bilirubin measurement (micromol/litre) 
0   > 100 > 100 
6 > 100 > 112 > 125 > 150 
12 > 100 > 125 > 150 > 200 
18 > 100 > 137 > 175 > 250 
24 > 100 > 150 > 200 > 300 
30 > 112 > 162 > 212 > 350 
36 > 125 > 175 > 225 > 400 
42 > 137 > 187 > 237 > 450 
48 > 150 > 200 > 250 > 450 
54 > 162 > 212 > 262 > 450 
60 > 175 > 225 > 275 > 450 
66 > 187 > 237 > 287 > 450 
72 > 200 > 250 > 300 > 450 
78  > 262 > 312 > 450 
84  > 275 > 325 > 450 
90  > 287 > 337 > 450 
96+  > 300 > 350 > 450 
Action 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Repeat bilirubin 
measurement in  
6–12 hours 
Consider 
phototherapy and 
repeat bilirubin 
measurement in 
6 hours 
Start phototherapy Perform an exchange 
transfusion unless the 
bilirubin level falls 
below threshold while 
the treatment is being 
prepared 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
4 
1.4 Summary of all recommendations 
 
ID Recommendations See Chapter/Section 
 
1 
Information for parents and carers  
Offer parents or carers information about neonatal jaundice that is tailored 
to their needs and expressed concerns. This information should be 
provided through verbal discussion backed up by written information. 
Care should be taken to avoid causing unnecessary anxiety to parents or 
carers. Information should include: 
• factors that influence the development of significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia  
• how to check the baby for jaundice 
• what to do if they suspect jaundice 
• the importance of recognising jaundice in the first 24 hours and of 
seeking urgent medical advice  
• the importance of checking the baby’s nappies for dark urine or pale 
chalky stools 
• the fact that neonatal jaundice is common, and reassurance that it is 
usually transient and harmless 
• reassurance that breastfeeding can usually continue. 
 
8 
 
2 
Care for all babies 
Identify babies as being more likely to develop significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia if they have any of the following factors: 
• gestational age under 38 weeks 
• a previous sibling with neonatal jaundice requiring phototherapy 
• mother’s intention to breastfeed exclusively 
• visible jaundice in the first 24 hours of life. 
 
3.1 
3 Ensure that adequate support is offered to all women who intend to 
breastfeed exclusively* 
3.1 
4 In all babies:  
• check whether there are factors associated with an increased likelihood 
of developing significant hyperbilirubinaemia soon after birth  
• examine the baby for jaundice at every opportunity especially in the 
first 72 hours. 
5.1 
5 Parents, carers and healthcare professionals should all look for jaundice 
(visual inspection). 
5.1 
6 When looking for jaundice (visual inspection):  
• check the naked baby in bright and preferably natural light 
• examination of the sclerae, gums and blanched skin is useful across all 
skin tones. 
5.1 
7 Do not rely on visual inspection alone to estimate the bilirubin level in a 
baby with jaundice.  
5.1 
8 Do not measure bilirubin levels routinely in babies who are not visibly 
jaundiced. 
4.1 
                                                 
* Refer to ‘Routine postnatal care of women and their babies’ (NICE clinical guideline 37) for information on breastfeeding support.  

Guidance summary 
5 
ID Recommendations See Chapter/Section 
9 Do not use any of the following to predict significant hyperbilirubinaemia  
• umbilical cord blood bilirubin level 
• end-tidal carbon monoxide (ETCOc) measurement 
• umbilical cord blood direct antiglobulin test (DAT) (Coombs’ test). 
4.2 
 
10 
Additional care  
Ensure babies with factors associated with an increased likelihood of 
developing significant hyperbilirubinaemia receive an additional visual 
inspection by a healthcare professional during the first 48 hours of life. 
 
5.1 
 
Urgent additional care for babies with visible jaundice in the first 24 hours  
11 Measure and record the serum bilirubin level urgently (within 2 hours) in 
all babies with suspected or obvious jaundice in the first 24 hours of life. 
4.1 
12 Continue to measure the serum bilirubin level every 6 hours for all babies 
with suspected or obvious jaundice in the first 24 hours of life until the 
level is both: 
• below the treatment threshold 
• stable and/or falling. 
4.1 
13 Arrange a referral to ensure that an urgent medical review is conducted (as 
soon as possible and within 6 hours) for babies with suspected or obvious 
jaundice in the first 24 hours of life to exclude pathological causes of 
jaundice. 
4.1 
14 Interpret bilirubin levels according to the baby’s postnatal age in hours 
and manage hyperbilirubinaemia according to the threshold table 
(Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6). 
4.1 
 
15 
Care for babies more than 24 hours old 
Measure and record the bilirubin level urgently (within 6 hours) in all 
babies more than 24 hours old with suspected or obvious jaundice. 
 
5.1 
 
16 
How to measure the bilirubin level  
When measuring the bilirubin level: 
• use a transcutaneous bilirubinometer in babies with a gestational age of 
35 weeks or more and postnatal age of more than 24 hours 
• if a transcutaneous bilirubinometer is not available, measure the serum 
bilirubin 
• if a transcutaneous bilirubinometer measurement indicates a bilirubin 
level greater than 250 micromol/litre check the result by measuring the 
serum bilirubin 
• always use serum bilirubin measurement to determine the bilirubin 
level in babies with jaundice in the first 24 hours of life 
• always use serum bilirubin measurement to determine the bilirubin 
level in babies less than 35 weeks gestational age 
• always use serum bilirubin measurement for babies at or above the 
relevant treatment threshold for their postnatal age, and for all 
subsequent measurements 
• do not use an icterometer. 
 
5.2 

Neonatal jaundice 
6 
ID Recommendations See Chapter/Section 
 
17 
Information for parents or carers on treatment 
Offer parents or carers information about treatment for 
hyperbilirubinaemia, including:  
• anticipated duration of treatment 
• reassurance that breastfeeding, nappy-changing and cuddles can usually 
continue. 
 
8 
18 Encourage mothers of breastfed babies with jaundice to breastfeed 
frequently, and to wake the baby for feeds if necessary. 
8 
19 Provide lactation/feeding support to breastfeeding mothers whose baby is 
visibly jaundiced. 
8 
 
20 
How to manage hyperbilirubinaemia  
Use the bilirubin level to determine the management of 
hyperbilirubinaemia in all babies (see threshold table (Section 1.3) and 
treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)). 
 
7.1.1 
21 Do not use the albumin/bilirubin ratio when making decisions about the 
management of hyperbilirubinaemia. 
6.1 
 
22 Do not subtract conjugated bilirubin from total serum bilirubin when 
making decisions about the management of hyperbilirubinaemia (see 
management thresholds in the threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment 
threshold graphs (Section 1.6)). 
6.1 
 
Measuring and monitoring bilirubin thresholds during phototherapy 
 
23 
Starting phototherapy 
Use serum bilirubin measurement and the treatment thresholds in the 
threshold table ( Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section  1.6) 
when considering the use of phototherapy.  
 
7.1.2 
24 In babies with a gestational age of 38  w eek s or more whose bilirubin is in  
the ‘repeat bilirubin measurement’ category in the threshold table  
(S
ection 1.3) r epeat the bilirubin measurement in 6–12 hours. 
7.1.2 
25 In babie s with a gestational age of 38  w eek s or more whose bilirubin is in 
the ‘consider phototherapy’ category in the threshold t able (Section 1.3) 
repeat the bilir ubin measurement in 6 hours regardless of whether or not 
phototherapy has subsequently been started. 
7.1.2 
26 Do not use phototherapy in babies whose bilirubin does not exceed the 
phototherapy threshold levels in the threshold table (Section 1.3) and 
treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6). 
7.1.2 
 
27 
During phototherapy 
During phototherapy: 
• repeat serum bilirubin measurement 4–6 hours after initiating 
phototherapy 
• repeat serum bilirubin measurement every 6–12 hours when the serum 
bilirubin level is stable or falling. 
 
7.1.2 

Guidance summary 
7 
ID Recommendations See Chapter/Section 
 
28 
Stopping phototherapy 
Stop phototherapy once serum bilirubin has fallen to a level at least 
50 micromol/litre below the phototherapy threshold (see threshold t able 
(Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)). 
 
7.1.2 
29 Check for rebound of significant hyperbilirubinaemia with a repeat serum 
bilirubin measurement 12–18 hours after stopping phototherapy. Babies 
do not necessarily have to remain in hospital for this to be done. 
7.1.2 
 
30 
Type of phototherapy to use 
Do not use sunlight as treatment for hyperbilirubinaemia. 
 
7.2.1 
 
31 
Single phototherapy treatment for term babies 
Use conventional ‘blue light’ phototherapy as treatment for significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia in babies with a gestational age of 37 weeks or more 
unless:  
• the serum bilirubin level is rising rapidly (more than 8.5 micromol/litre 
per hour) 
• the serum bilirubin is at a level that is within 50 micromol/litre below 
the threshold for which exchange transfusion is indicated after 72 hours 
(see the threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs 
(Section 1.6)).  
 
7.2.1 
32 Do not use fibreoptic phototherapy as first- line treatment for 
hyperbilirubinaemia for babies with a gestational age of 37 weeks or 
more. 
7.2.1 
 
33 
Single phototherapy treatment in preterm babies 
Use either fibreoptic phototherapy or conventional ‘blue light’ 
phototherapy as treatment for significant hyperbilirubinaemia in babies 
less than 37 weeks unless:  
• the serum bilirubin level is rising rapidly (more than 8.5 micromol/litre 
per hour) 
• the serum bilirubin is at a level that is within 50 micromol/litre below 
the threshold for which exchange transfusion is indicated after 72 hours 
(see treatment threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold 
graphs (Section 1.6)). 
 
7.2.1 
 Continuous multiple phototherapy treatment for term and pre term babies 
34 Initiate continuous multiple phototherapy to treat all babies if any of the 
following apply: 
• the serum bilirubin level is rising rapidly (more than 8.5 micromol/litre 
per hour) 
• the serum bilirubin is at a level within 50 micromol/litre below the 
threshold for which exchange transfusion is indicated after 72 hours 
(see threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs 
(Section 1.6)). 
• the bilirubin level fails to respond to single phototherapy (that is, the 
level of serum bilirubin continues to rise, or does not fall, within 
6 hours of starting single phototherapy) 
7.2.1 
35 If the serum bilirubin level falls during continuous multiple phototherapy 
to a level 50 micromol/litre below the threshold for which exchange 
transfusion is indicated step down to single phototherapy. 
7.1.1 

Neonatal jaundice 
8 
ID Recommendations See Chapter/Section 
 
36 
Information for parents or carers on phototherapy 
Offer parents or carers verbal and written information on phototherapy 
including all of the following: 
• why phototherapy is being considered 
• why phototherapy may be needed to treat significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia  
• the possible adverse effects of phototherapy 
• the need for eye protection and routine eye care 
• reassurance that short breaks for feeding, nappy changing and cuddles 
will be encouraged 
• what might happen if phototherapy fails 
• rebound jaundice 
• potential long-term adverse effects of phototherapy 
• potential impact on breastfeeding and how to minimise this. 
 
8 
 
37 
General care of the baby during phototherapy 
During phototherapy: 
• place the baby in a supine position unless other clinical conditions 
prevent this 
• ensure treatment is applied to the maximum area of skin  
• monitor the baby’s temperature and ensure the baby is kept in an 
environment that will minimise energy expenditure (thermoneutral 
environment)  
• monitor hydration by daily weighing of the baby and assessing wet 
nappies 
• support parents and carers and encourage them to interact with the 
baby. 
 
7.2.2, 7.2.3 
38 Give the baby eye protection and routine eye care during phototherapy.  7.2.2 
39 Use tinted headboxes as an alternative to eye protection in babies with a 
gestational age of 37 weeks or more undergoing conventional ‘blue light’ 
phototherapy. 
7.2.2 
 
40 
Monitoring the baby during phototherapy 
During conventional ‘blue light’ phototherapy: 
• using clinical judgement, encourage short breaks (of up to 30 minutes) 
for breastfeeding, nappy changing and cuddles 
• continue lactation/feeding support  
• do not give additional fluids or feeds routinely. 
Maternal expressed milk is the additional feed of choice if available, and 
when additional feeds are indicated. 
 
7.2.3 
41 During multiple phototherapy: 
• do not interrupt phototherapy for feeding but continue administering 
intravenous/enteral feeds 
• continue lactation/feeding support so that breastfeeding can start again 
when treatment stops. 
Maternal expressed milk is the additional feed of choice if available, and 
when additional feeds are indicated. 
7.2.3 

Guidance summary 
9 
ID Recommendations See Chapter/Section 
 
42 
Phototherapy equipment 
Ensure all phototherapy equipment is maintained and used according to 
the manufacturers’ guidelines. 
 
7.2.1 
43 Use incubators or bassinets according to clinical need and availability.  7.2.4 
44 Do not use white curtains routinely with phototherapy as they may impair 
observation of the baby. 
7.2.4 
 
45 
Factors that influence the risk of kernicterus 
Identify babies with hyperbilirubinaemia as being at increased risk of 
developing kernicterus if they have any of the following: 
• a serum bilirubin level greater than 340 micromol/litre in babies with a 
gestational age of 37 weeks or more  
• a rapidly rising bilirubin level of greater than 8.5 micromol/litre per 
hour  
• clinical features of acute bilirubin encephalopathy. 
 
3.2 
 
46 
Formal assessment for underlying disease 
In addition to a full clinical examination by a suitably trained healthcare 
professional, carry out all of the following tests in babies with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia as part of an assessment for underlying disease (see 
threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)): 
• serum bilirubin (for baseline level to assess response to treatment) 
• blood packed cell volume 
• blood group (mother and baby) 
• DAT (Coombs’ test). Interpret the result taking account of the strength of 
reaction, and whether mother received prophylactic anti-D 
immunoglobulin during pregnancy.  
 
6.1 
47 When assessing the baby for underlying disease consider whether the 
following tests are clinically indicated: 
• full blood count and examination of blood film 
• blood glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase levels, taking account of 
ethnic origin  
• microbiological cultures of blood, urine and/or cerebrospinal fluid (if 
infection is suspected). 
6.1 
 
48 
Care of babies with prolonged jaundice 
In babies with a gestational age of 37 weeks or more with jaundice lasting 
more than 14 days, and in babies with a gestational age of less than 
37 weeks with jaundice lasting more than 21 days:  
• look for pale chalky stools and/or dark urine that stains the nappy  
• measure the conjugated bilirubin 
• carry out a full blood count 
• carry out a blood group determination (mother and baby) and DAT 
(Coombs’ test). Interpret the result taking account of the strength of 
reaction, and whether mother received prophylactic anti-D 
immunoglobulin during pregnancy. 
• carry out a urine culture 
• ensure that routine metabolic screening (including screening for 
congenital hypothyroidism) has been performed. 
 
6.2 

Neonatal jaundice 
10 
ID Recommendations See Chapter/Section
49 Follow expert advice about care for babies with a conjugated bilirubin 
level greater than 25 micromol/litre because this may indicate serious liver 
disease. 
6.2
 
50 
Intravenous immunoglobulin 
Use intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (500 mg/kg over 4 hours) as an 
adjunct to continuous multiple phototherapy in cases of Rhesus 
haemolytic disease or ABO haemolytic disease when the serum bilirubin 
continues to rise by more than 8.5 micromol/litre per hour. 
 
7.4
51 Offer parents or carers information on IVIG including: 
• why IVIG is being considered 
• why IVIG may be needed to treat significant hyperbilirubinaemia  
• the possible adverse effects of IVIG 
• when it will be possible for parents or carers to see and hold the baby. 
8
52 
Exchange transfusion 
Offer parents or carers information on exchange transfusion including: 
• the fact that exchange transfusion requires that the baby be admitted to 
an intensive care bed 
• why an exchange transfusion is being considered 
• why an exchange transfusion may be needed to treat significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia  
• the possible adverse effects of exchange transfusions 
• when it will be possible for parents or carers to see and hold the baby 
after the exchange transfusion. 
8
53 Use a double-volume exchange transfusion to treat babies: 
• whose serum bilirubin level indicates its necessity (see threshold table 
(Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)) 
 and/or 
• with clinical features and signs of acute bilirubin encephalopathy. 
7.3
54 During exchange transfusion do not : 
• stop continuous multiple phototherapy 
• perform a single-volume exchange 
• use albumin priming 
• routinely administer intravenous calcium. 
7.3
55 Following exchange transfusion:  
• maintain continuous multiple phototherapy  
• measure serum bilirubin level within 2 hours and manage according to 
threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs 
(Section 1.6). 
7.3

Guidance summary 
11 
ID Recommendations See Chapter/Section 
 
56 
Other therapies 
Do not use any of the following to treat hyperbilirubinaemia: 
• agar 
• albumin 
• barbiturates 
• charcoal 
• cholestyramine 
• clofibrate 
• D- penicillamine 
• glycerin 
• manna 
• metalloporphyrins 
• riboflavin 
• traditional Chinese medicine 
• acupuncture 
• homeopathy. 
 
7.4 
1.5 Research recommendations 
1.5.1 Key priorities for research 
What are the factors that underlie the association between breastfeeding and jaundice?  
Why this is important 
Evidence: Breastfeeding has been shown to be a factor in significant hyperbilirubinaemia. The 
reasons for this association have not yet been fully elucidated. Population: Infants in the first 
28 days of life. Exposure: Feeding type (breast milk, formula feeds or mixed feeds). Comparison: 
Infants who do not develop significant hyperbilirubinaemia will be compared with infants with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia. Outcome: Factors to be analysed include I) maternal factors, II) 
neonatal factors, III) blood analyses. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
What is the comparative effectiveness and cost -effectiveness of universal pre- discharge 
transcutaneous bilirubin screening alone or combined with a risk assessment in reducing 
jaundice-related neonatal morbidity and hospital readmission? 
Why this is important 
Evidence: There is good evidence that a risk assessment that combines the result of a timed 
transcutaneous bilirubin level with risk factors for significant hyperbilirubinaemia is effective at 
preventing later significant hyperbilirubinaemia.Population: Babies in the first 28 days of life. 
Subgroups should include near-term babies and babies with dark skin tones. Exposure: A/ Timed 
pre-discharge transcutaneous bilirubin level. B/ Timed pre -discharge transcutaneous bilirubin 
level combined with risk assessment. Comparison: Standard care (discharge without timed 
transcutaneous bilirubin level). Outcome: i) Significant hyperbilirubinaemiaii) Cost-
effectiveness, III) Parental anxiety. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
What is the comparative accuracy of the Minolta JM -103 and the BiliChek when compared to 
serum bilirubin levels in all babies? 
Why this is important 
Evidence: The accuracy of transcutaneous bilirubinometers (Minolta JM- 103 and BiliChek) has 
been adequately demonstrated in term babies below treatment levels (bilirubin 
< 250 micromol/litre). New research is needed to evaluate the accuracy  of different 
transcutaneous bilirubinometers in comparison to serum bilirubin levels in all babies. 
Population: Babies in the first 28 days of life. Subgroups to include preterm  babies, babies with 
dark skin tones, babies with high levels of bilirubin and babies after phototherapy. Exposure: 
Bilirubin levels taken from different transcutaneous bilirubinometers. Comparison: Bilirubin 

Neonatal jaundice 
12 
levels assessed using serum (blood) tests. Outcome: Diagnostic accuracy (sensitivity, specificity, 
positive predictive value, negative predictive value), parental anxiety, staff and parental 
satisfaction with test and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009  
How frequently and for how long can conventional  phototherapy be interrupted without 
adversely effecting clinical outcomes? 
Why this is important 
Evidence: The effectiveness and tolerability of intermittent phototherapy has been adequately 
demonstrated in term babies at low treatment levels (bilirubin < 250 micromol/litre). New 
research is needed to evaluate the effectivenes s and tolerability of different frequencies of 
interruptions of different durations. Population: Babies in the first 28 days of life in conventional 
phototherapy. Exposure: Interruptions of 45 or 60 minutes either on demand, every hour or 
every 2 hours. Co mparison: Interruptions of up to 30 minutes every 3 hours. Outcome: 
Effectiveness in terms of the mean decrease in bilirubin levels and the mean duration of 
phototherapy. Extra outcomes should include adverse effects, parental bonding and parental 
anxiety, staff and parental satisfaction with treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 
2009 
National registries are needed of cases of significant hyperbilirubinaemia, kernicterus and 
exchange transfusions. 
Why this is important 
Evidence: There is good evidence that prospective surveys in the UK and from a national 
Kernicterus Register in the US can help is identify root- causes of kernicterus and acute bilirubin 
encephalopathy. Population: All children with a peak bilirubin level greater than 
450 micromol/litre which is the threshold for an exchange transfusion recommended by NICE. 
Exposure: All maternal, prenatal, peri- natal and neonatal factors. Comparison: Not applicable. 
Outcome: Shortcomings in clinical and service provision to prevent recurring theme s in 
kernicterus cases. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
1.5.2 Other research recommendations 
What is the clinical and cost-effectiveness of: 
● LED phototherapy compared to conventional phototherapy in term and preterm babies 
with significant hyperbilirubinaemia? 
Why this is important 
Existing research has shown that while there is no difference between LED phototherapy and 
conventional phototherapy, LED phototherapy may be easier to use in clinical setting by 
reducing the need for additional fluids. New randomised  controlled trials are needed to 
examine LED phototherapy. Population: Term and preterm  babies with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 28 days of life. Interventions: LED phototherapy compared with 
fiberoptic phototherapy or conventional phototherapy. Outcome: Effectiveness in terms of the 
mean decrease in bilirubin levels and the mean duration of phototherapy. Extra outcomes 
should include adverse effects, parental bonding and parental anxiety, staff and parental 
satisfaction with treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
● fibreoptic phototherapy using large pads compared to conventional phototherapy in term 
babies with significant hyperbilirubinaemia? 
Why this is important 
Existing research has demonstrated the effectiveness of fiberoptic phototherapy in preterm  
babies but not in term babies. This is due to that fact that existing fiberoptic pads are small and 
cannot ensure adequate skin coverage in larger babies. New devices using larger pads may be 
effective in term babies. New randomised  controlled trials are needed to examine fiberoptic 
phototherapy which uses larger pads. Population: Term babies with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 28 days of life. Interventions: Fiberoptic phototherapy with 
larger pads compared with conventional phototherapy. Outcome: Effectiveness in terms of 
mean decrease in bilirubin levels and mean duration of phototherapy. Extra outcomes should 

Guidance summary 
13 
include adverse effects, family adjustment, breastfeeding effects, parental bonding and anxiety, 
staff and parental satisfaction with treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
What is the effectiveness, cost -effectiveness and safety of Clofibrate alongside phototherapy 
versus phototherapy alone for non-haemolytic significant hyperbilirubinaemia? 
Why this is important 
Existing resea rch has demonstrated that Clofibrate in combination with phototherapy can 
shorten time spent undergoing phototherapy. This can help minimise the disruption to 
breastfeeding and mother -baby bonding. However no studies have been carried out in a UK 
population. New placebo- controlled double -blind randomis ed controlled trials in a UK 
population are needed. Population: Term and preterm  babies with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 28 days of life. Interventions: Clofibrate (a single 100mg/kg 
dose) combined with phototherapy versus phototherapy with a placebo. Outcome: Effectiveness 
in terms of mean decrease in bilirubin levels and mean duration of phototherapy. Extra 
outcomes should include adverse effects, parental bonding and parental anxiety, staff and 
parental satisfaction with treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009  
What is the clinical and cost -effectiveness of IVIG when used to prevent exchange transfusion 
in newborns with haemolytic disease and rising bilirubin? 
Why this is important 
Existing research has demonstrated that IVIG is effective in preventing the need for an exchange 
transfusion in babies with Rhesus haemolysis. New placebo- controlled double -blind 
randomised controlled trials are needed to examine if IVIG is effective in sub- groups of babies 
with ABO haemolysis, ie preterm  babies, babies with bilirubin rising greater than 
10 micromol/litre per hour  or babies with co- morbid illnesses such as infections. Population: 
Term and preterm  babies with significant hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 28 days of life. 
Interventions: IVIG (500mg/kg over 4 hours) alongside phototherapy versus phototherapy alone. 
Outcome: Number of exchange transfusions needed. Extra outcomes should include adverse 
effects, mean duration of phototherapy, parental anxiety, staff and parental satisfaction with 
treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
1.6 Treatment threshold graphs 
The graphs on pages 14– 29 show the gestational age specific thresholds for inititiating and 
stopping treatment. An electronic interactive impl ementation tool for treatment thresholds is 
available at www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG98. 
1.7 Investigation, phototherapy and exchange transfusion pathways 
The pathways for investigation, phototherapy and exchange transfusion are on pages 30– 32. 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
14 


Guidance summary 
15 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
16 
 

Guidance summary 
17 


Neonatal jaundice 
18 
 

Guidance summary 
19 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
20 
 

Guidance summary 
21 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
22 
 
  

Guidance summary 
23 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
24 


Guidance summary 
25 


Neonatal jaundice 
26 


Guidance summary 
27 


Neonatal jaundice 
28 


Guidance summary 
29 


Neonatal jaundice 
30 


Guidance summary 
31 


Neonatal jaundice 
32 


 
33 
2 Introduction 
2.1 Neonatal jaundice 
Jaundice is one of the most common conditions requiring medical attention in newborn babies. 
Approximately 60% of term and 80% of preterm babies develop jaundice in the first week of 
life, and about 10% of breastfed babies are still jaundiced at 1 month of age. In most babies 
with jaundice the vre is no underlying disease, and this early jaundice (termed ‘physiological 
jaundice’) is generally harmless. However, there are pathological causes of jaundice in the 
newborn, which, although rare, need to be detected. Such pathological jaundice may co- exist 
with physiological jaundice. 
Neonatal jaundice refers to yellow colouration of the skin and the sclera (whites of the eyes) of 
newborn babies that results from accumulation of bilirubin in the skin and mucous membranes. 
This is  associated with a raised level of bilirubin in the circulation, a condition known as 
hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Bilirubin 
Bilirubin is a breakdown product of the red cells in the blood. Red cell breakdown produces 
unconjugated (or ‘indirect’) bilirubin, which is mostly bound to albumin. Unconjugated 
bilirubin is metabolised in the liver to produce conjugated (or ‘direct’) bilirubin, which then 
passes through the gut and is excreted in the stool. Bilirubin can be reabsorbed again from 
stools remaining in the gut. 
Newborn babies’ red blood cells have a shorter lifespan than those of adults. The concentration 
of red blood cells in the circulation is also higher in newborns than it is in adults , so bilirubin 
levels are higher than they are later in life. The metabolism , circulation and excretion of 
bilirubin is also slower than in adults. Thus a degree of hyperbilirubinaemia occurring as a result 
of this normal physiological mechanism is common in newborn babies and usually harmless. It 
is difficult to tell which babies are at risk of developing high levels of bilirubin that could 
become dangerous, or who have a serious problem as the explanation for their jaundice, which 
is why this guideline has been developed. 
Physiological jaundice 
Breastfed babies are more likely than bottle -fed babies to develop physiological jaundice within 
the first week of life  but the appearance of jaundice is not a reason to stop breastfeeding . 
Physiological jaundice refers to the common, generally harmless, jaundice seen in many 
newborn babies in the first weeks of life and for which there is no underlying cause. The 
reasons for the association between breastfeeding and neonatal jaundice have not yet been fully 
elucidated but may include inadequate breastfeeding support leading to a reduced intake, 
sluggish gut action leading to an increase in the entero- hepatic circulation of bilirubin, or 
unidentified factors in breast milk. Finally, it may be that there is a relative reduction of bilirubin 
levels in formula -fed babies due to increased clearance of bilirubin from the gut. Current NHS 
practice of early postnatal discharge, often within 24 hours, reduces the opportunity to assess 
whether successful lactation has been established  and to provide adequate breastfeeding 
support and advice. Existing  guidelines, including ‘Routine postnatal care of women and their 
babies', NICE clinical guideline 37 (2006) ( www.nice.org.uk/CG37), deal with breastfeeding 
and lactation/feeding support and have been referred to wherever appropriate. 
Prolonged jaundice 
Prolonged jaundice, that is jaundice persisting beyond the first 14 days, is also seen more 
commonly in term breastfed babies. The mechanism for this ‘breast milk jaundice’ is still not 

Neonatal jaundice 
34 
completely understood and the condition appears to be generally harmless. However, prolonged 
jaundice can be a clue to serious underlying liver disease and should be assessed carefully. 
Causes of pathological jaundice 
Jaundice may also have other, non- physiological, causes, including blood group incompatibility 
(most commonly Rhesus  or ABO incompatibility), other causes of haemolysis, sepsis, bruising 
and metabolic disorders. Gilbert syndrome and Crigler –Najjar syndrome  are rare causes of 
neonatal jaundice and are caused by liver enzyme problems. Deficiency of a particular enzyme, 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), can cause severe neonatal jaundice. G6PD 
deficiency is more common in certain ethnic groups and is familial. Congenital obstruction and 
malformations of the biliary system, such as biliary atresia, cause an obstructive jaundice with 
conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. This condition needs specialist investigation and early surgical 
treatment, preferably before 8 weeks of life. 
Bilirubin encephalopathy and kernicterus 
In young babies, unconjugated bilirubin can penetrate the membrane that lies between the 
brain and the blood (the blood– brain barrier). Unconjugated bilirubin is potentially toxic to 
neural tissue (brain and spinal cord). Entry of unconjugated bilirubin into the brain can cause 
both short- term and long -term neurological dysfunction. Acute features include lethargy, 
irritability, abnormal muscle tone and posture, temporary cessation of breathing (apnoea) and 
convulsions. This presentation is known as acute bilirubin encephalopathy. Bilirubin is 
deposited particularly in a part of the brain known as the globus pallidus, part of the ‘deep grey 
matter’ of the brain. On pathological examination of the brain, this produces yellow staining; 
this staining is referred to as  kernicterus. The term kernicterus is also used to denote the clinical 
features of acute or chronic bilirubin encephalopathy. Features of the latter include athetoid 
cerebral palsy, hearing loss, and visual and dental problems. The exact level of bilirubin that is 
likely to cause neurotoxicity in any individual baby varies, and depends on the interplay of 
multiple factors which include acidosis, gestational and postnatal age, rate of rise of serum 
bilirubin, serum albumin concentration, and concurrent illness (including infection).  
Although neonatal jaundice is very common, kernicterus is very rare. There is a poor correlation 
between levels of circulating bilirubin and the occurrence of bilirubin encephalopathy. There 
seems to be tremendous variability in susceptibility towards bilirubin encephalopathy among 
newborns for a variety of unexplained reasons. However, there are certain factors that probably 
influence the passage of bilirubin into the brain and hence increase the risk of acute bilirubin 
encephalopathy. These include preterm birth, sepsis, hypoxia, seizures, acidosis and 
hypoalbuminaemia. The rate of rise of the level of bilirubin is probably important, hence the 
increased risk of kernicterus in babies with haemolytic disease such as G6PD deficiency, ABO 
or Rhesus haemolytic disease. 
Kernicterus in healthy term babies with none of the above factors is virtually unknown below a 
serum bilirubin concentration of 450 micromoles of bilirubin per litre (micromol/litre ), but the 
incidence increases above this threshold level and the risk of kernicterus is greatly increased in term 
babies with bilirubin levels above 515 micromol/litre. Kernicterus is also known to occur at lower 
levels of bilirubin in preterm and in term babies who have any of the factors described above. 
Treatment of jaundice 
Levels of bilirubin can be controlled by placing the baby under a lamp emitting light in the blue 
spectrum, which is known as phototherapy. Light energy of the appropriate wavelength converts the 
bilirubin in the skin to a harmless form that can be excreted in the urine. Phototherapy has proved to 
be a safe and effective treatment for jaundice in newborn babies, reducing the need to perform an 
exchange transfusion of blood (the only other means of removing bilirubin from the body). 
Clinical recognition and assessment of jaundice can be difficult. This is particularly so in babies 
with darker skin. Once jaundice is recognised, there is uncertainty about when to treat. Currently, 
there is widespread variation in the use of phototherapy, exchange transfusion and other 
treatments when using charts, but there is already a degree of consistency in the NHS about 
treatment thresholds when healthcare professionals base their decisions on a formula that uses 

Introduction 
35 
gestational age.1 There is a need for more uniform, evidence -based practice, and for consensus-
based practice where such evidence is lacking, hence the importance of this guideline. 
2.2 Aim of the guideline 
Clinical guidelines have been defined as ‘systematically developed statements which assist 
clinicians and patients in making decisions about appropriate treatment for specific conditions’. 2 
This clinical guideline concerns the management of neonatal jaundice in babies from birth up to 
28 days of age. 
This guideline has been developed with the aim of providing guidance on:  
● r ecognition and assessment 
● p rediction of later significant hyperbilirubinaemia and adverse sequelae 
● t reatment 
● i nformation and education for parents/carers of babies with jaundice. 
2.3 Areas outside the remit of the guideline 
This guideline does not address: 
● p rimary prevention of jaundice 
● j aundice that requires surgical treatment to correct the underlying cause 
● m anagement of babies with conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia, although we consider the 
importance of identifying conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. 
2.4 Who has developed the guideline 
The guidance was developed by a multi- professional and lay working group (the Guideline 
Development Group or GDG) convened by the National Collaborating Centre for Women's and 
Children's Health (NCC-WCH). Membership included: 
● two neonatologists (one as Chair) 
● two midwives 
● one general practitioner 
● one paediatrician 
● one pathologist 
● one specialist nurse 
● one community nurse 
● one health visitor 
● two patient/carer members. 
Staff from the NCC- WCH provided methodological support for the guidance development 
process, undertook systematic searches, retrieved and appraised the evidence, and wrote 
successive drafts of the guidance. 
One external adviser was appointed by the GDG to advise on pharmacological interventions.  
All GDG members' and external advisers' potential and actual conflicts of interest were 
recorded on declaration forms provided by NICE (summarised in Appendix B). None of the 
interests declared by GDG members constituted a material conflict of interest that would 
influence recommendations developed by the GDG. 
2.5 Related NICE guidance 
● Diabetes in pregnancy: management of diabetes and its complications from pre-conception to 
the postnatal period. NICE clinical guideline 63 (2008). Available from 
www.nice.org.uk/CG63 
● Antenatal care: routine care for the healthy pregnant woman. NICE clinical guideline 62 
(2008). Available from www.nice.org.uk/CG62 

Neonatal jaundice 
36 
● Intrapartum care: care of healthy women and their babies during childbirth. NICE clinical 
guideline 55 (2007). Available from www.nice.org.uk/CG55 
● Routine postnatal care of women and their babies. NICE clinical guideline 37 (2006). 
Available from www.nice.org.uk/CG37 
2.6 Guideline methodology 
This guideline was developed in accordance with the NICE guideline development process 
outlined in the 2005  and 2009 editions of the Guidelines technical manual 
(www.nice.org.uk/guidelinesmanual). Table  2.1 summarises the key stages of the guideline 
development process and which version of the process was followed for each stage.  
Table 2.1 Stages in the NICE guideline development process and the guideline versions followed at 
each stage 
Stage 2005 2007 2009 
Scoping the guideline (determining what the guideline would and would not cover)    
Preparing the work plan (agreeing timelines, milestones, guideline development group 
constitution etc) 
   
Forming and running the guideline development group    
Developing clinical questions    
Identifying the evidence    
Reviewing and grading the evidence    
Incorporating health economics    
Making group decisions and reaching consensus    
Linking guidance to other NICE guidance    
Creating guideline recommendations    
Developing clinical audit criteria    
Writing the guideline    
Validation (stakeholder consultation on the draft guideline)    
Pre-publication check    
Internal validity check    
Declaration of interests    
Literature search strategy 
Initial scoping searches were executed to identify relevant guidelines (local, national and 
international) produced by other development groups. The reference lists in these guidelines 
were checked against subsequent searches to identify missing evidence.  
Relevant published evidence to inform the guideline development process and answer the 
clinical questions was identified by systematic search strategies. The questions are presented in 
Appendix H. 
Systematic searches to answer the clinical questions formulated and agreed by the Guideline 
Development Group (GDG ) were executed using the following databases via the ‘Ovid’ 
platform: Medline (1966 onwards), Embase (1980 onwards), Cumulative Index to Nursing and 
Allied Health Literature (1982 onwards), and PsycINFO (1967 onwards). The most recent search 
conducted for the three Cochrane databases (Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, and the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects) 
was Quarter 2, 2009. Searches to identify economic studies were undertaken using the above 
databases and the NHS Economic Evaluations Database (NHS EED). 
Search strategies combined relevant controlled vocabulary and natural language in an effort to 
balance sensitivity and specificity. Unless advised by the GDG, searches were not date specific. 
Language restrictions were not applied to searches, although publications in languages other 

Introduction 
37 
than English were not appraised. Both generic and specially developed methodological search 
filters were used appropriately. 
There was no systematic attempt to search grey literature (conferences, abstracts, theses and 
unpublished trials). Hand searching of journals not indexed on the databases was not 
undertaken. 
Towards the end of the guideline development process, searches were updated and re-executed, 
thereby including evidence published and included in the databases up to June 2009. Studies 
identified after this date could only be included if they were  specifically requested during the 
consultation process. Evidence published after this date has not been included in the guideline. 
This date should be considered the starting  point for searching for new evidence for future 
updates to this guideline. 
Further details of the search strategies, including the methodological filters employed, are 
presented in Appendix I. 
Appraisal and synthesis of clinical effectiveness evidence 
Evidence relating to clinical effectiveness was reviewed using established guides 3-7;8 and 
classified using the established hierarchical system presented in Table  2.2 
(www.nice.org.uk/guidelinesmanual). This system reflects the susceptibility to bias that is 
inherent in particular study designs. 
The type of clinical question dictates the highest level of evidence that may be sought. In 
assessing the quality of the evidence, each study receives a quality rating coded as ‘++’, ‘+’ or 
‘−’. For issues of therapy or treatment, the highest possible evidence level (EL) is a well-
conducted systematic review or meta -analysis of randomised controlled trials (RCTs; EL 1++) 
or an individual RCT (EL  1+). Studies of poor quality are rated as ‘ −’. Usually, studies rated as 
‘−’ should not be used as a basis for making a recommendation, but they can be used to inform 
recommendations. For issues of prognosis, the highest possible level of evidence is a cohort 
study (EL 2). A level of evidence was assigned to each study, and to the body of evidence for 
each question. 
Table 2.2 Levels of evidence for intervention studies 
Level  Source of evidence 
1++ High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials (RCTs), or RCTs 
with a very low risk of bias 
1+ Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or RCTs with a low risk of bias 
1− Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or RCTs with a high risk of bias 
2++ High-quality systematic reviews of case–control or cohort studies; high-quality case–control or 
cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding, bias or chance and a high probability that 
the relationship is causal 
2+ Well-conducted case–control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding , bias or chance 
and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal 
2− Case–control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding, bias or chance and a significant 
risk that the relationship is not causal 
3 Non-analytical studies (e.g. case reports, case series) 
4 Expert opinion, formal consensus 
 
For each clinical question, the highest available level of evidence was selected. Where 
appropriate, for example, if a systematic review, meta -analysis or RCT existed in relation to a 
question, studies of a weaker design were not considered. Where systematic reviews, meta -
analyses and RCTs did not exist, other appropriate experimental or observational studies were 
sought. For diagnostic tests, test evaluation studies examining the performance of the test were 
used if the efficacy (accuracy) of the test was required, but where an evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the test in the clinical management of patients and the outcome of disease was 
required, evidence from RCTs or cohort studies was optimal. For studies evaluating the accuracy 

Neonatal jaundice 
38 
of a diagnostic test, sensitivity, specificity and positive and negative predictive values (PPVs and 
NPVs) were calculated or quoted where possible (see Table 2.3). 
Table 2.3 ‘2 × 2’ table for calculation of diagnostic accuracy parameters 
 Reference standard positive Reference standard negative Total 
Test positive a (true positive) b (false positive) a+b 
Test negative c (false negative) d (true negative) c+d 
Total a+c b+d a+b+c+d = N (total 
number of tests in study) 
Sensitivity = a/(a+c), specificity = d/(b+d), PPV = a/(a+b), NPV = d/(c+d) 
 
The system described above covers studies of treatment effectiveness. However, it is less 
appropriate for studies reporting accuracy of diagnostic tests. In the absence of a validated 
ranking system for this type of test, NICE has developed a hierarchy of evidence that takes into 
account the various factors likely to affect the validity of these studies (see Table  2.4).8 
Table 2.4 Levels of evidence for studies of the accuracy of diagnostic tests 
Level Type of evidence  
Ia Systematic review (with homogeneity)a of level-1 studiesb 
Ib Level-1 studiesb 
II Level-2 studiesc; systematic reviews of level-2 studies 
III Level-3 studiesd; systematic reviews of level-3 studies 
IV Consensus, expert committee reports or opinions and/or clinical experience without 
explicit critical appraisal; or based on physiology, bench research or ‘first principles’ 
a Homogeneity means there are minor or no variations in the directions and degrees of results between individual 
studies that are included in the systematic review. 
b Level-1 studies are studies that use a blind comparison of the test with a validated reference standard (‘gold’ standard) 
in a sample of patients that reflects the population to whom the test would apply. 
c Level-2 studies are studies that have only one of the following: 
 • narrow population (the sample does not reflect the population to whom the test would apply) 
 • use a poor reference standard (defined as that where the ‘test’ is included in the ‘reference’, or where the ‘testing’  
 affects the ‘reference’) 
 • the comparison between the test and reference standard is not blind 
 • case–control studies. 
d Level-3 studies are studies that have at least two or three of the features listed above. 
 
Clinical evidence for individual studies was extracted into evidence tables (see Appendix H) 
and, where possible, quantitative synthesis (meta -analysis) was carried out. If no meta -analysis 
was possible, a brief summary of each study was included in the guideline text. If an analysis 
was carried out, the results may be presented pictorially (i.e. forest plots, summary ROC curves) 
as well as in the text. If no meta -analysis was carried out, the results from each included study 
are reported in the text and, where appropriate , in summary tables. The body of evidence 
identified for each clinical question was synthesised qualitatively or quantitatively in clinical 
evidence statements that accurately reflect the evidence. 
Lists of excluded studies for each clinical question are presented in Appendix J. 
Specific considerations for this guideline 
For this guideline, the effectiveness of interventions was assessed against the following outcome 
domains: 
● s erum bilirubin concentrations (change from baseline) 
● d uration of treatment 
● t reatment failure 
● a dverse effects 
● m ortality. 

Introduction 
39 
If bilirubin concentrations were presented as mg/dl, these were converted to the SI  unit 
micromol/litre by multiplying by 17.1. 
Where data were missing, typically standard deviations of change scores, these were imputed 
using a standard formula as recommended in  S ection 16.1.3.2 of the Cochrane Handbook  
(www.cochrane-handbook.org/): 
     22
E,change E,baseline E,final E,baseline E,fin alSD SD SD 2 Corr SD SD  
Instead of calculating a correlation coefficient for each individual study, it was decided to use a 
correlation of 0.80 as an arbitrary cut-off value. 
The number needed to treat (NNT) was calculated with the following formula : 
Table 2.5 ‘2 x 2’ table for calculation of number needed to treat (NNT) 
 Outcome present  Outcome absent  
Treated A C 
Control B D 
 
   
  
1NNT AA B CC D  
Health economics 
The aim of the economic input in this guideline was to inform the GDG of potential economic 
issues relating to neonatal jaundice, and to ensure that recommendations represented a cost-
effective use of scarce resources. 
The GDG sought to identify relevant economic evidence for this guideline, but no published 
evidence was identified that fully answered the guideline questions. Had any such evidence 
been identified, it would have been assessed using a quality assessment checklist based on good 
practice in decision- analytic modelling (because no standard system of grading the quality  of 
economic evaluations exists). 
Where it is not possible to make recommendations based on published economic evidence, the 
guideline health economist may undertake de novo  economic analysis. Health economic 
analysis may be required for a clinical question where there are genuine competing alternatives 
for decision-makers that may have implications for healthcare resources and patient outcomes.  
Cost-effectiveness analysis can provide clarity as to which alternative is currently the best option 
for the NHS. 
After GDG discussion of the clinical questions it became apparent that economic analysis 
would not actually influence the recommendations as originally expected, since genuine 
alternatives to current practice did not practically exist in the NHS. For example, ‘no treatment’ 
would not be considered as a serious alternative to phototherapy or exchange transfusion in any 
modern healthcare system. 
Therefore, the remaining areas where health economics was thought to be important in guiding 
recommendations was around testing for hyperbilirubinaemia and the use of intravenous 
immunoglobulin (IVIG). The results of the economic analyses are summarised briefly in the 
guideline text (Sections  5.2 and 7.4, respectively). A more detailed description of the health 
economic methods and results are presented in Appendices C and D, respectively.  
GDG interpretation of the evidence and formulation of recommendations 
For each clinical question, recommendations for clinical care were derived using, and linked 
explicitly to, the evidence that supported them. In the first instance, informal consensus 
methods were used by the GDG to agree clinical evidence statements. Statements summarising 
the GDG’s interpretation of the clinical and economic evidence and any extrapolation 

Neonatal jaundice 
40 
(including economic modelling) from the evidence used to form recommendations were also 
prepared. In areas where no substantial evidence was identified, the GDG considered other 
evidence-based guidelines and consensus statements or used their collective experience  to 
identify good practice. The GDG also identified areas where evidence to answer their clinical 
questions was lacking and used this information to draft recommendations for future research.  
Towards the end of the guideline development process, formal consensus methods were used to 
consider all the clinical care recommendations that had been drafted previously. Consensus was 
again used to agree the wording of recommendations. All recommendations for which at least 
one GDG member indicated any level of disagreement were discussed at a subsequent GDG 
meeting, and the final wording was agreed following discussion of the relevant issues. 
The GDG identified key priorities for implementation which were those recommendations 
expected to have the biggest impact on patients’ care and patients’ outcomes in the NHS as a 
whole. Each GDG member submitted a  paper form indicating their top ten  recommendations in 
order of priority. The GDG members’ votes were collated and priority recommendations were 
obtained by including all recommendations that had been voted for by at least four GDG 
members in order of popularity. 
Stakeholder involvement in the guideline development process 
Registered stakeholder organisations were invited to comment on the draft scope of the 
guideline and on the draft guideline. Stakeholder organisations were also invited to undertake a 
pre-publication check of the final guideline to identify factual inaccuracies. The GDG carefully 
considered and responded to all comments received from stakeholder organisations. The 
comments and responses, which were reviewed independently for NICE by a Guidelines 
Review Panel, are published on the NICE website. 

 
41 
3 F actors that influence 
hyperbilirubinaemia and 
kernicterus 
Introduction 
Some disorders cause red cells  to be more fragile than normal and to break down more easily 
(haemolysis), and this process can add significantly to the bilirubin load. Some of these 
disorders are inherited. Other problems include increased destruction of red cells by circulating 
antibodies directed against them. Historically , Rhesus haemolytic disease (involving Rhesus 
blood group antibodies) was a major cause of kernicterus but, thanks to effective prevention and 
treatment of Rhesus  incompatibility, other causes of haemolysis, such as ABO incompatibility, 
have assumed increasing importance. Large areas of bruising with extravasated and damaged 
red blood cells can also contribute to the bilirubin load requiring clearance by the liver. For 
reasons that are not understood, babies who are breastfed have higher bilirubin levels than 
those who are ‘formula’-fed. 
This chapter examines the evidence for and against the factors that have been suggested as 
candidates for identifying babies at higher risk of developing significant hyperbilirubinaemia, 
and therefore kernicterus. 
Clinical question 
What are the factors associated with an increased risk of hyperbilirubinaemia? Which factors 
affect the relationship between neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus or other 
adverse outcomes (neurodevelopmental, auditory)? 
A common literature search was conducted for both of the sub-questions and 1865 abstracts and 
titles were identified from the electronic databases. After primary screening, hard copies of 98 
articles were retrieved. There were many studies that had evaluated the association between 
various demographic, maternal and neonatal factors with increased or decreased risk of 
hyperbilirubinaemia, but most did not control for confounding variables and were therefore 
excluded. For the second sub-question, few good-quality studies were identified. 
This review includes 16 studies: ten studies evaluating the risk factors for development of 
hyperbilirubinaemia and 3 studies each for the risk factors of kernicterus and adverse sequelae.  
3.1 Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia 
Description of included studies 
Of the ten studies9-18 included under this section,  eight are from the USA9-12;14;16-18 and two from 
Israel.13;15 Except for one cross- sectional survey  of EL III,18 all studies are comparative 
observational studies, all of EL II. The results of all comparative studies on risk factors are 
presented in Table 3.1. 
Review findings 
A nested case –control study was carried out at 11 hospitals of a health maintenance 
organisation in the USA 9 to investigate predictors of hyperbilirubinaemia and evaluate the 

Neonatal jaundice 
42 
predictive accuracy of a risk index model. The cohort consisted of 51 387 babies with 
birthweight ≥ 2000 g and gestational age ≥ 36 weeks born at these hospitals during a 2- year 
period. Babies with peak serum bilirubin levels ≥ 427 micromol/litre within the first 30 days 
after birth were defined as cases (n  = 73), while controls were a random sample of babies from 
the cohort with maximum serum bilirubin levels below this level (n  = 423). Information on the 
risk factors was collected by reviewing hospital records and interviewing parents. Using 
bivariate analysis, various clinical and demographic factors were found to be associated with an 
increased risk of hyperbilirubinaemia. The  maternal factors considered included race, maternal 
age, history of jaundice in a previous sibling , and vacuum delivery. Neonatal factors considered 
included male sex, lower gestational age, early jaundice (defined either as  bilirubin levels 
exceeding age-specific phototherapy thresholds, or phototherapy during birth hospitalisation, or 
jaundice noted in first 20 hours and bilirubin levels were not taken within 6 hours of that time), 
cephalohaematoma, bruising, and exclusively breastfed at time of discharge. These factors were 
then entered into multiple regression analysis to find independent predictors of 
hyperbilirubinaemia. When all cases were included, the presence of early jaundice (adjusted 
odds ratio (OR) 7.3, 95% CI 2.8 to 19.0), gestational age  (in weeks) at birth (adjusted OR  0.6, 
95% CI 0.4 to 0.7), exclusive breastfeeding at discharge (adjusted OR  6.9, 95% CI 2.7 to 17.5), 
Asian race (adjusted OR 3.1, 95%  CI 1.5 to 6.3), the presence of bruising (adjusted OR 3.5, 
95% CI 1.7 to 7.4) , cephalohaematoma (adjusted OR  3.2, 95% CI 1.1 to 9.2), and maternal age 
≥ 25 years (adjusted OR 2.6, 95%  CI 1.1 to 9.2) were all independently associated with 
hyperbilirubinaemia. When cases with early jaundice were excluded, the results were similar 
except that family history of jaundice showed evidence of statistically significant association 
with later hyperbilirubinaemia (adjusted OR 6.0, 95% CI 1.0 to 36.0). [EL II] 
The above study was expanded10 in order to examine the association between jaundice noted in 
the first 24 hours of life and the risk of later hyperbilirubinaemia and the need for phototherapy. 
This study included babies born during a period of 4 years (compared to 2 years in the first 
study9) and the baseline cohort population included 1 05 384 newborn babies. The criteria for 
study selection and definitions of cases (n  = 140) and controls (n  = 631) were unchanged. 
Information on the timing of the appearance of jaundice was extracted by medical records 
analysts and this process was reliably assessed by a second analyst blindly re -abstracting data 
from a random sample of 25 medical records (κ  statistic for agreement = 0.75). Data on the use 
of phototherapy and development of hyperbilirubinaemia (maximum serum bilirubin levels 
≥ 427 micromol/litre) were also obtained from hospital records. Among the controls, the 
cumulative probability of jaundice being noticed within 18 hours of birth was 2.8% and within 
24 hours of birth it was 6.7% (these proportions were estimated using Kaplan– Meier survival 
analysis after correcting for age of discharge). On adding the number of newborns who had 
serum bilirubin measured within 24 hours (as a proxy measure of jaundice noticed in first 
24 hours) to the above data , the proportions increased to 3.8% by 18 hours and 7.9% at 
24 hours. There was no statistically significant association between jaundice noticed within 
24 hours and risk factors such as ethnicity, sex, gestational age, breastfeeding  or 
cephalohaematoma. Although most of the babies did not require any intervention, these babies 
were 10 times more likely to be treated with phototherapy compared with newborns noted not 
to have jaundice in the first 24 hours (18.9% v ersus 1.7%; Mantel –Haenszel OR 10.1, 95% CI 
4.2 to 24.4). Moreover , the early jaundiced babies were found to have a statistically significant 
increase in the risk of developing hyperbilirubinae mia above 427 micromol/litre (14.3% versus 
5.9%; Mantel–Haenszel OR 2.9, 95% CI 1.6 to 5.2). [EL II] 
Another nested case control study from the USA 11 estimated the effect of phototherapy and 
other factors on the risk of developing severe hyperbilirubinaemia (defined as serum bilirubin 
levels ≥ 427 micromol/litre) in babies who had serum bilirubin levels close to the American 
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) phototherapy threshold levels .19 The cohort included 285 295 
babies with gestational age  ≥ 34 weeks and birthweight ≥ 2000 g born between 1995 and 
2004 in a health maintenance organisation. Babies with resolving jaundice, those whose serum 
bilirubin levels were not fully documented, and those with conjugated bilirubin level 
≥ 34 micromol/litre were excluded. A subset of babies (n = 13 843) with a serum bilirubin level 
between 291 and 392 micromol/litre at ≥ 48 hours of age was identified. Babies with serum 
bilirubin concentration ≥  427 micromol/litre were selected as cases ( n = 62), and four controls 
were selected randomly for each case (n  = 248). Cases and controls were matched for risk status 

Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus 
43 
(low, medium and high risk based on the hour -specific bilirubin centiles, gestational age and 
direct antiglobulin test ( DAT) results) and the difference between their serum bilirubin levels 
and the AAP phototherapy threshold levels. Data on all variables were extracted from electronic 
and paper records of admissions, outpatient visits and home health visits. The cases and controls 
did not differ significantly by sex, race, birthweight or duration of hospitalisation. Moreover , the 
two groups had similar mean serum bilirubin levels and percentage weight loss from birth. 
Bivariate analysis showed that lower gestational age, bruising on examination, serum bilirubin 
concentration between 291 and 392 micromol/litre occurring during birth hospitalisation, serum 
bilirubin increase of ≥ 102 micromol/litre per day, and exclusive breast feeding (after qualifying 
serum bilirubin levels)  were statistically significantly associated with an increased risk of 
hyperbilirubinaemia (P < 0.04), while inpatient phototherapy was found to significantly reduce 
the risk. Multivariate analysis revealed that the strongest predictors of increased risk of severe 
hyperbilirubinaemia were lower gestational age (adjusted OR 3.1, 95%  CI 1.2 to 8.0 for 38–
39 weeks and adjusted OR  3.7, 95%  CI 0.6 to 22.7 for 34–37 weeks compared with 40+ 
weeks as the reference), bruising on examination (adjusted OR  2.4, 95% CI 1.2 to 4.8), serum 
bilirubin increase of ≥ 102 micromol/litre per day (adjusted OR 2.5, 95%  CI 1.2 to 5.5) and 
exclusive breastfeeding after reaching the qualifying serum bilirubin levels (adjusted OR 2.0, 
95% CI 1.03 to 4.0). It was also reported that male sex, race, and the mode of feeding before 
the qualifying bilirubin level did not predict severe hyperbilirubinaemia. [EL II] 
In a retrospective cohort study conducted in a community teaching hospital in the USA ,12 a 
clinical risk factor score was developed and its predictive ac curacy was compared with pre-
discharge serum bilirubin measurements plotted on the bilirubin nomogram. The study 
population included babies with birthweight ≥ 2000 g ( if gestational age  ≥ 36 weeks) and 
birthweight ≥ 2500 g (if gestational age  ≥ 35 weeks) who participated in the hospital’s early 
discharge programme and who had both pre- and post- discharge serum bilirubin measured. 
Hyperbilirubinaemia was taken as post -discharge serum bilirubin level > 95th centile on the 
nomogram. Hospital records were reviewed retrospectively to collect information on various 
risk factors (baby, maternal, pregnancy and delivery factors), and their association with 
hyperbilirubinaemia was explored by univariate analysis. All factors found to be associated with 
the outcome at P  < 0.2 level of significance were considered for the final risk factor score 
based on logistic regression modelling. For univariate analysis, the baby factors found to be 
associated with an increased risk of hyperbilirubinaemia (at P  < 0.2 level of significance) 
included gestational age  < 38 weeks and ≥  40 weeks, large for gestational age, high pre -
discharge serum bilirubin and higher birthweight; the maternal factors included maternal 
diabetes, breastfe eding and combined breast- and bottle -feeding; the pregnancy, labour and 
delivery factors included vacuum extraction, prolonged rupture of membranes and oxytocin 
use. Three factors were found to be associated with decreased risk of hyperbilirubinaemia : small 
for gestational age, parity and caesarean section. All these factors were then analysed for the 
final risk factor model using step- wise logistic regression, except for pre -discharge serum 
bilirubin level/risk zone, which was analysed separately. Results from the regression analysis 
showed the following factors to be statistically significantly associated with hyperbilirubinaemia: 
gestational age < 38 weeks (adjusted OR 2.6, 95% CI 1.5 to 4.5), oxytocin use during labour 
(adjusted OR 2.0, 95% CI 1.2 to 3.4), vacuum delivery (adjusted OR 2.2, 95% CI 1.5 to 3.6), 
exclusive breastfeeding (adjusted OR 2.6, 95% CI 1.5 to 4.5), combination of breast- and bottle-
feeding (adjusted OR  2.3, 95% CI 1.1 to 4.9), and birthweight (for every 0.5 kg increase above 
2.5 kg: adjusted OR 1.5, 95%  CI 1.2 to 1.9). The predictive accuracy of pre -discharge serum 
bilir
ubin level/risk zone was evaluated separately from the risk factor model, and it was shown 
to predict hyperbilirubinaemia more accurately than the risk factor model alone. [ EL II] 
A prospective cohort study from Israel 13 evaluated the ability of prenatal and intrapartum 
characteristics and early serum bilirubin measurements to predict hyperbilirubinaemia in 
healthy term babies. The study included 1177 babies ( ≥ 37 weeks of gestation). Babies with 
either blood group incompatibility with a positive direct DAT  or G6PD deficiency were 
excluded. Serum bilirubin levels were obtained within the first 8 to 2 4 hours of life and 
repeated daily for the next 4 days. In all, 5.1% (60 of 1177) of babies developed 
hyperbilirubinaemia (defined as serum bilirubin level > 171 micromol/litre at day  2, 
> 239 micromol/litre at day  3, and > 291 micromol/litre at day  4–5. Using multiple logistic 
regression analysis , serum bilirubin le vel > 85 micromol/litre on day  1 had a  statistically 

Neonatal jaundice 
44 
significant association with hyperbilirubinaemia  (adjusted OR 36.5, 95% CI 15.9 to 83.6) There 
was also a statistically significant association when analysed by 17 micromol/litre increments on 
day 1 (adjusted OR 3.1, 95%  CI 2.4 to 4.1 per 17 micromol/litre). Change in bilirubin levels 
between day  1 and day  2 was also found to have a statistically significant association with 
hyperbilirubinaemia (adjusted OR 2.4, 95% CI 1.9 to 3.0 per 17 micromol/litre). O ther factors 
found to be associated with hyperbilirubinaemia were maternal blood group O (adjusted 
OR 2.9, 95% CI 1.5 to 5.8), maternal age per year (adjusted OR  1.1, 95% 1.0 to 1.2), maternal 
education per year (adjusted OR  0.8, 95% CI 0.7 to 0.9), and exclusive breastfeeding (adjusted 
OR 0.4, 95% CI 0.2 to 0.9). [EL II] 
Another prospective cohort study from the USA 14 aimed to evaluate the predictive accuracy of 
clinical risk factors, pre -discharge bilirubin levels expressed as risk zones, and a combination of 
pre-discharge bilirubin levels and additional risk factors. The study population comprised babies 
managed exclusively in the w ell-baby nursery of an urban tertiary care hospital. Since the 
population served by the hospital was  predominantly black, stratified sampling was used to 
obtain a representative sample. The study included 812 term and near -term healthy newborns 
managed exclusively in the w ell-baby nursery with gestational age ≥ 36 weeks and birthweight 
≥ 2000 g, or gestational age ≥ 35 weeks and birthweight ≥ 2500 g. About 7% of babies were 
lost to follow -up and, of the remaining babies, 6.4% (48 of 751) developed significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia (d ay 3 –5 serum bilirubin or transcutaneous bilirubin levels exceeding or 
within 17 micromol/litre of the hour -specific phototherapy treatment thresholds recommended 
by the AAP). Using univariate analysis, the factors that were statistically associated with the 
development of significant hyperbilirubinaemia (at P  < 0.05) were pre -discharge bilirubin in 
the high and high– intermediate risk zones, gestational age  < 38 weeks, mother’s intention to 
breastfeed, either exclusively or combined with bottle -feeds, grade  4 or higher jaundice 
observed clinically as per the Kramer scale (only for  non-black babies), vacuum delivery and 
female sex. When all these factors were added in a step- wise logistic regression model (except 
the pre -discharge bilirubin risk zones), only five factors were found to be independently 
associated with significant hyperbilirubinaemia : gestational age  < 38 weeks ( OR 19, 95%  CI 
6.3 to 56), mother’s intention exclusively to breastfeed ( OR 3.7, 95% CI 1.1 to 13), black race 
(OR 0.22, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.61), grade 4 or higher jaundice observed clinically (OR 1.7, 95% CI 
1.2 to 2.6), and female sex (OR 3.2, 95% CI 1.2 to 8.4). [EL II] 
In another nested c ase–control study from Israel, 15 data were collected retrospectively from the 
charts of 10 122 term singleton babies born at a tertiary hospital over a 4 year period. Bilirubin 
levels were routinely measured in all clinically jaundiced newborns and all mothers were 
interviewed within 48 hours of delivery. A total of 1154 term babies (11.4%) who developed 
serum bilirubin levels ≥ 221 micromol/litre constituted the test group, while , from the 
remainder, every tenth admission with serum bilirubin levels < 221 micromol/litre was 
randomly selected to form the comparison group (n  = 1154). Univariate analysis was done to 
compare the two groups and it showed high serum bilirubin levels to be statistically significantly 
associated with a number of maternal, baby and delivery variables. These variables were then 
included in a step-wise logistic regression analysis and the final model revealed six factors to be 
independently associated with development of high serum bilirubin levels. These factors were 
maternal age > 35 years (adjusted OR  1.7, 95%  CI 1.3 to 2.3), male sex (adjusted OR  1.4, 
95% CI 1.2 to
 1.7), primiparity (adjusted OR  2.7, 95 % CI 2.1 to 3.5), previous sibling with 
jaundice (adjusted OR  2.3, 95% CI 1.9 to 2.8), early gestation (for 37 weeks adjusted OR  4.5, 
95% CI 3.2 to 6.3; for 38 weeks adjusted OR  2.1, 95% CI 1.6 to 2.8), and vacuum extraction 
(adjusted OR 3.0, 95% CI 2.1 to 4.4). [EL II] 
In a retrospective study from the USA ,16 the risk of recurrence of hyperbilirubinaemia in siblings 
was studied in 3301 offspring of 1669 male US Army veterans participating in a nationwide 
study of veterans’ health. Babies who had a different mother’s name from the rest of the sibling 
relationship (paternal half- siblings), stillbirths, and babies with records showing evidence of 
haemolytic disease of newborns were excluded. In case of a twin delivery (n = 34), only one 
baby was randomly included for the study. Birth details of each baby were obtained by 
interviews and detailed information extracted from hospital medical records by trained staff. 
Hyperbilirubinaemia (defined as peak serum bilirubin levels ≥  205 micromol/litre) was present 
in 4.5% of the babies (147 of 3301). Newborns who had one or more prior sibling s with 

Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus 
45 
hyperbilirubinaemia showed a three -fold higher risk of developing hyperbilirubinaemia 
compared with those who had prior sibling without hyperbilirubinaemia (10.3% versus  3.6%; 
OR 3.1, 95% CI 1.4 to 6.8). In the next stage of analysis, potential confounding factors (race, 
sex, gestational age, maternal age, year of birth, delivery type, gravidity, breastfeeding, obstetric 
anaesthesia and neonatal asphyxia) were adjusted in a logistic regression analysis and the risk of 
recurrence assessed for different degrees of jaundice : mild (peak serum bilirubin levels 
≤ 205 micromol/litre), moderate (205– 256 micromol/litre) and severe hyperbilirubinaemia 
(≥ 256 micromol/litre). The results showed a clear trend of increasing sibling risk with 
increasing severity of hyperbilirubinaemia. There was a 2.7 times higher risk of mild jaundice in 
newborns who had a sibling with mild jaundice (25.3% versus  11.1%; OR 2.7, 95% CI 1.8 to 
4.1), and the risk was four  times greater for the moderate jaundice group (8.8% versus 2.3%; 
OR 4.1, 95% CI 1.5 to 10.8). Babies who had a prior sibling with severe hyperbilirubinaemia 
showed a 12 times higher risk of developing jaundice compared with those who had no sibling 
with severe hyperbilirubinaemia (10.5% versus 0.9%; OR 12.5, 95% CI 2.3 to 65.3). [EL II] 
In another nested case–control study from the USA,17 the charts of 11 456 babies were searched 
electronically to identify babies who had been r eadmitted for hyperbilirubinaemia (total serum 
bilirubin > 291 micromol/litre). Babies who had received phototherapy before discharge were 
excluded. A total of 75 babies (0.7%) constituted the test group, and these were matched with 
75 randomly selected controls who had not been r eadmitted. The two groups were compared 
and a step-wise logistic regression analysis to determine the smallest subset of predictors of the 
difference between the groups. Three factors were identified: early gestation (for 35 to 
36 6/7 weeks: adjusted OR 20.79, 95%  CI 2.34 to 184.74; for 37 to 37 6/7 weeks: adjusted 
OR 14.86, 95% CI 1.91 to 115.38), exclusive breastfeeding (adjusted OR 10.75, 95% CI 2.37 to 
48.82 and finally transcutaneous bilirubin levels  above the 95th percentile on the Bhutani 
nomogram (adjusted OR 149.89, 95% CI 20.41 to > 999.99). [EL II] 
A survey of mothers of babies with gestational age  ≥ 35 weeks discharged from a w ell-baby 
nursery of a health maintenance organisation in the USA 18 was conducted to evaluate how 
closely mother’s race documented in medical records correlated with self -reported race, and to 
analyse the correlation between mother’s and newborn’s race in the context of risk for neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Maternal and neonatal data were extracted from the organisation’s 
database and maternal race was placed in one of seven  categories. Further information from the 
mothers about their experience of breastfeeding, neonatal care, hyperbilirubinaemia detection, 
interventions and education, and racial ancestry for mother, father and newborn (allowing up to 
five responses for ancestry of each) w as elicited through a computerised telephone survey. Of 
the 3021 mothers available for potential inclusion, only 41% could be contacted and, of them, 
69% (866 of 1248) completed the survey. Of these , 145 mothers were documented as white in 
the medical records, but only 64% of them self -reported as white, while , of 427 mothers 
documented as black in medical records, only 70% self -reported as black. For mothers of Asian 
and Middle Eastern origin, the agreement between the two sources was 35% and 50% , 
respectively. About 15% of the mothers described themselves as being of  multiracial (two or 
more races) origin and 9% reported that the father was multiracial, but only 11% (93 of 866) 
reported their baby as multiracial. When racial ancestry was further explored among the 
newborns reported as being of two or more  races, the primary race matched that of the parents 
in 41% of cases only. In 23% of babies, the primary race was assigned to the mother’s race and 
in 25% to the father’s race , with 11% assigned to the race of n either mother nor  father. 
Moreover, of the 70 newborns born to parents of different ethnic origins, only 64% were 
reported as multiracial. [EL III] 
Evidence summary 
There i s consistent evidence from good- quality studies to show that four factors are 
independently associated with an increased risk of hyperbilirubinaemia – gestational age 
< 38 weeks, jaundice within 24 hours of birth, increase in severity of clinicall y apparent 
jaundice and intent ion to breastfeed exclusively. Five studies evaluated family history of 
jaundice as a risk factor and four found it to be statistically significantly associated with 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Bruising was reported as a statistically significant risk factor in only two 
studies. Results from most studies show no  s tatistically significant association between 
cephalohaematoma, vacuum delivery, male sex or race and hyperbilirubinaemia. 

Neonatal jaundice 
46 
GDG translation from evidence 
Factors significantly associated with hyperbilirubinaemia are gestational age  < 38 weeks, 
visible jaundice within 24 hours of birth and history of a previous sibling with neonatal 
jaundice. The GDG refined the latter to family history of neonatal jaundice requiring treatment 
with phototherapy because neonatal jaundice is so common. 
This evidence is consistent with the NICE guideline on ‘P ostnatal care’, which recommends that 
‘babies who develop jaundice within the first 24 hours after birth should be evaluated as an 
emergency action’ (www.nice.org.uk/CG37). 
The GDG has  used the term ‘ intention to breastfeed exclusively’ in a practical sense because 
most babies are discharged home before breastfeeding has been fully established. At this time 
the only risk factor that can be identified is the intention to breastfeed exclusively as opposed to 
‘breastfeeding exclusively’. Early postnatal discharge also limits the opportunity to assess 
lactation, and to provide adequate breastfeeding support and advice. 
The GDG acknowledges the strong evidence that the intention exclusively to breastf eed is a risk 
factor for hyperbilirubinaemia while also recognising the benefits of breastfeeding to both 
mother and child. This was discussed at length as the GDG did not want to give the message 
that breast milk feeding should be replaced by formula milk  if a baby i s being treated for 
jaundice. The GDG ha s recommended that adequate lactation/ feeding support be provided, 
including support for expressing breast milk  if the baby requires treatment. The GDG feels that 
this support would be augmented if more w ere known about factors underlying the association 
between breastfeeding and jaundice, and to this end has  made a research recommendation on 
this topic. 
It is commonly believed that bruising, cephalohaematoma and vacuum delivery all contribute 
towards development of hyperbilirubinaemia, but the evidence was inconclusive. 
 
Recommendations – 3.1 Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia 
Identify babies as being more likely to develop significant hyperbilirubinaemia if they have 
any of the following factors: 
• gestational age under 38 weeks 
• a previous sibling with neonatal jaundice requiring phototherapy 
• mother’s intention to breastfeed exclusively 
• visible jaundice in the first 24 hours of life. 
Ensure that adequate support is offered to all women who intend to breastfeed exclusively.* 
 
                                                 
* Refer to ‘Routine postnatal care of women and their babies’ (NICE clinical guideline 37) for information on breastfeeding support.  

Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus 
47 
Research recommendations 
What are the factors that underlie the association between breastfeeding and jaundice?  
Why this is important 
Evidence: Breastfeeding has been shown to be a factor in significant hyperbilirubinaemia. The 
reasons for this association have not yet been fully elucidated. Population: Infants in the first 
28 days of life. Exposure: Feeding type (breast milk, formula feeds or mixed feeds). 
Comparison: Infants who do not develop significant hyperbilirubinaemia will be compared 
with infants with significant hyperbilirubinaemia. Outcome: Factors to be analysed include I) 
maternal factors, II) neonatal factors, III) blood analyses. Time stamp: Sept 2009  
What is the comparative effectiveness and cost -effectiveness of universal pre -discharge 
transcutaneous bilirubin screening alone or combined with a risk assessment in reducing 
jaundice-related neonatal morbidity and hospital readmission? 
Why this is important 
Evidence: There is good evidence that a risk assessment that combines the result of a timed 
transcutaneous bilirubin level with risk factors for significant hyperbilirubinaemia is effective 
at preventing later significant hyperbilirubinaemia.Population: Babies in the first 28 days of 
life. Subgroups should include near-term babies and babies with dark skin tones. Exposure: A/ 
Timed pre -discharge transcutaneous bilirubin level. B/ Timed pre -discharge transcutaneous 
bilirubin level combined with risk assessment. Comparison: Standard care (discharge without 
timed transcutaneous bilirubin level). Outcome: i) Significant hyperbilirubinaemia , ii) Cost-
effectiveness, III) Parental anxiety. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
 
3.2 Risk factors for kernicterus and/or adverse sequelae 
Description of included studies 
Three studies 20-22 were identified that  examined the association between risk factors and the 
development of ker nicterus: two comparative studies 21;22 [ EL II] and one descriptive study .20 
[EL III] 
For adverse sequelae, two studies 23;24 [ EL II] looked at the association between 
hyperbilirubinaemia and neurodevelopmental outcomes (one in term babies 23 and the other in 
extremely low birthweight babies24) and one study25 [EL II] evaluated risk factors for hearing loss. 
Review findings 
A prospective study conducted over a 1 year period in a tertiary referral neonatal unit in India 22 
sought to determine the risk factors for the development of kernicterus in term babies with non-
haemolytic jaundice. The inclusion criteria were total serum bilirubin levels 
> 308 micromol/litre, absence of haemolysis and absence of major malformations. Laboratory 
investigations were carried out to rule out haemolysis, meningitis, intracranial haemorrhage and 
other pathology. Exchange transfusions were done whenever serum bilirubin levels reached 
342 micromol/litre. There were 64 babies eligible for the study, of whom 14 (21.9 %) had 
kernicterus. In all cases, stage  II encephalopathy was reported: all the babies with kernicterus 
had stage  II bilirubin encephalopathy character ised by presence of opisthotono s, rigidity and 
paralysis of upward gaze. There was no statistically significant difference between affected and 
unaffected babies in gender, mean gestational age, mean birthweight, proportion exclusively 
breastfed and postnatal weight. Mean peak serum bilirubin levels, free bilirubin levels, 
bilirubin/albumin ratio and free fatty acid levels were statistically significantly higher in case s 
than in babies without kernicterus. Multiple logistic regression analyses showed birth asphyxia 
(OR 8.3, 95% CI 1.2 to 111.8; P = 0.03), serum bilirubin levels ( OR 1.15, 95% CI 1.04 to1.3; 
P < 0.01) and free bilirubin levels (OR  1.1, 95%  CI 1.04 to 2.2; P < 0.01) to be statistically 
significantly associated with the development of kernicterus. [EL II] 

Neonatal jaundice 
48 
In a retrospective matched c ase–control study from a university hospital in the USA ,21 all babies 
showing kernicterus at autopsy during a 6 year period were classified as cases ( n = 32) while 
babies without kernicterus at autopsy constituted the control group (n  = 32). Both groups were 
matched for the year of birth, gestational age, birthweight, and duration of survival. Data on 
multiple clinical, historical and laboratory variables were derived from hospital records. 
Gestational age ranged from 25 to 41 weeks with a mean gestational age  of 31 weeks for both 
the groups, while birthweight ranged between 750 and 5000 g (mean 1800 g ). Variables 
evaluated included maternal gravidity, maternal age, 1 minute Apgar scores, lowest 
haematocrit, lowest pH, average pH, hypoxia, peak serum bilirubin, hypercarbia and lowest 
temperature. There was no statistically significant difference between the cases and the controls 
for any of the variables evaluated on univariate or multivariate analysis. Multivariate analysis 
also failed to determine any factor that was statistically significant. [EL II] 
A retrospective study from the USA 20 compared clinical and demographic histories of late 
preterm babies who suffered kernicterus with those of affected term babies, all of whom were 
entered in the Pilot Kernicterus Registry. Babies were included if they had been discharged well 
after birth and subsequently suffered kernicterus. A total of 125 of the 142 cases reported to the 
Registry met the inclusion criteria. The mean birthweight of the study population was 3281 g 
and the mean gestational age  was 38 weeks. Mortality among cases was 4.8%. The total serum 
bilirubin levels, age at re -hospitalisation, and birthweight distribution were similar for the late 
preterm (34 to < 37 weeks, n = 29) and the term babies (> 37 weeks, n = 96). More late 
preterm babies developed kernicterus as compared with term babies (38% versus 25%; 
P < 0.05). Similarly , severe post -icteric sequelae occurred in 83% of the late preterm babies 
compared with 71% in the term babies. T he percentage of large for gestational age babies 
among the late preterm group who developed kernicterus was statistically significantly higher 
compared with that in the term group (34.9% versus 24.7%; P < 0.01). [EL III] 
A multicentre prospective cohort study from the USA 23 examined the association between 
serum b ilirubin concentration and neurodevelopmental outcomes. The study population 
included first- born white and black singleton babies with birthweight ≥ 2500 g who survived 
for at least 1 year and had at least one bilirubin measurement recorded (n  = 41 324). Each baby 
had serum bilirubin measured between 36 and 60 hours of age (as close to 48 hours as possible) 
and subsequent sampling was done on clinical grounds. The outcomes evaluated were 
intelligence quotient (IQ) assessment by psychologists (using Wechsle r Intelligence Scale for 
Children) at the age of 7 years, blinded neurological examination by paediatric neurologists or 
other trained clinicians at the age of 7 years, and hearing evaluation performed at 8 years of age 
using pure-tone audiometry. Multiple  logistic regression analysis was performed to control for 
potential confounding variables (maternal education level, parity, feeding method during 
nursery stay, oxytocin use, birthweight, maternal age). The study also looked for variables (race, 
gender, gestational age, DAT result, exchange transfusion) that could act as effect modifiers for 
the relationship between bilirubin levels and the defined outcomes. Follow -up data were 
available for 80% of the study population. About 1% of the white babies (n  = 21 375) had peak 
serum bilirubin level ≥  342 micromol/litre while the proportion among the black babies 
(n = 19 949) was 0.6%. No statistically significant association was seen between high serum 
bilirubin levels and IQ scores or sensorineural hearing loss. Abnormal neurological examination 
was reported more commonly in children with high serum bilirubin levels 
(≥ 342 micromol/litre) compared with those with lower serum bilirubin levels, but the 
difference was statistically not significant (4.5% versus 3.8%; RR 1.2, 95%  CI 0.7 to 2.1). 
However, it was observed that there was a statistically significant linear increase in the risk of 
‘suspicious’ abnormal neurological examination with an increase in the serum bilirubin levels 
(OR 1.12, 95%  CI 1.06 to 1.2). This  association was not statistically significant when serum 
bilirubin levels were ana lysed as a dichotomous variable. Sensorineural hearing loss was not 
associated with high bilirubin levels, but only 50% of study participants had undergone hearing 
evaluation. [EL II] 
A prospective cohort study conducted in a university hospital neonatal unit in Malaysia 25 
evaluated the risk factors associated with hearing loss in term babies with serum bilirubin levels 
> 339 micromol/litre. The study included 128 jaundiced term babies with a mean age of 
jaundice onset being 3.4 days. Babies with congenital anomalies and those receiving 

Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus 
49 
aminoglycoside a ntibiotics were excluded. Screening for he aring loss was done using brain-
stem-evoked response on the day of discharge. The outcome assessors were blinded to 
treatment and serum bilirubin levels. Altogether 35% of the babies had hyperbilirubinaemia 
(defined as serum bilirubin levels ≥  340 micromol/litre); hearing loss was detected in 22%  of 
the babies. Although there was a higher percentage of babies with hearing loss among those 
with hyperbilirubinaemia compared with babies with serum bilirubin levels below 
40 micromol/litre, the difference was not statistically significant (33% versus  16%; P = 0.11). 
After controlling for various confounding factors in a logistic regression analysis, variables 
statistically significantly associated with hearing loss were j aundice that  required exchange 
transfusion and an earlier onset of hyperbilirubinaemia. [EL II] 
Another retrospective multicentre study from the USA 24 assessed the association between peak 
serum bilirubin levels and neurodevelopmental outcomes in extremely low birthw eight babies 
(birthweight range 401 –1000 g) born during a 4 year period who survived to 14 days of age. 
Trained and certified personnel performed a  comprehensive history, physical examination and 
neurodevelopmental assessment at 18–22 months age. Blinding was not reported. The variables 
indicative of abnormal neurodevelopment included Psychomotor Developmental Index (PDI) 
< 70, Mental Developmental Index (MDI) < 70, moderate or severe cerebral palsy, hearing 
impairment (needing hearing aids), and a composite category designated as 
neurodevelopmental impairment (NDI). Of 3167 babies eligible for the study, 2575 (81%) were 
followed up. Regression analysis showed various demographic and clinical variables to be 
associated with poor neurodevelopmental outcomes. However , after adjustment for these risk 
factors, statistically significant associations were found only between peak serum bilirubin levels 
and death or NDI ( OR 1.07, 95% CI 1.03 to 1.11), PDI < 70 (OR 1.06, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.12), 
and hearing impairment requiring hearing aids ( OR 1.14, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.30). There was no 
statistically significant association between peak serum bilirubin levels and cer ebral palsy, MDI 
< 70 or NDI in extremely low birthweight babies. [EL II] 
Evidence summary 
There is a  lack of good- quality evidence on the association between hyperbilirubinaemia and 
kernicterus or other adverse sequelae. 
One small cohort study reported a history of birth asphyxia, higher serum bilirubin levels and 
free bilirubin levels as statistically significant risk factors for kernicterus in term babies. A poor -
quality retrospective study found no statistically significant difference between babies dia gnosed 
with kernicterus at autopsy and those without. In a third study, a higher proportion of late 
preterm babies developed kernicterus and post- icteric sequelae compared with term babies, but 
the difference was not statistically significant. 
Three studie s evaluated the association of high serum bilirubin levels  (> 340 micromol/litre) 
with adverse sequelae: two studies were in term babies and one in babies with birthweight less 
than 1000 g . One study in term babies found no statistically significant association between 
hyperbilirubinaemia and IQ, abnormal neurological examination or sensorineural hearing loss. 
Another study reported severe jaundice requiring exchange transfusion and early onset of 
jaundice as statistically significant risk factors for hearing loss. The third study found a weak 
association between high serum bilirubin levels and neurodevelopmental impairment, hearing 
impairment and psychomotor impairment in babies with birthweight less than 1000 g. 
GDG translation from evidence 
No good-quality studies identified risk factors for kernicterus. 
Poor-quality studies have shown a link between kernicterus and both high serum bilirubin levels 
and free bilirubin levels in all babies. 
Severe jaundice requiring exchange transfusion (criterion was  bilirubin > 340 micromol/litre) 
and early onset of jaundice (within 24 hours) are statistically significant risk factors for hearing 
loss. Deafness is a clinical manifestation of kernicterus. Haemolytic disorders such as  G6PD 
deficiency and ABO incompatibility m ay cause a rapid increase in bilirubin level, and these 
disorders have been over -represented in international kernicterus registries and population 
studies of significant hyperbilirubinaemia (see C hapter 6 on formal assessment). A study of l ow-

Neonatal jaundice 
50 
birthweight babies found a weak association between high serum bilirubin levels 
(> 340 micromol/litre) and neurodevelopmental impairment, hearing impairment and 
psychomotor impairment. 
There was no evidence to support race, sex or maternal age as significant risk factors. 
The GDG has made a research recommend ation for surveys of severe hyperbilirubinaemia and 
kernicterus which would lead to better understanding of the risk factors for kernicterus. 
 
Recommendation – 3.2 Risk factors for kernicterus/or adverse sequelae 
Identify babies with hyperbilirubinaemia as being at increased risk of developing kernicterus 
if they have any of the following: 
• a serum bilirubin level greater than 340 micromol/litre in babies with a gestational age of 
37 weeks or more  
• a rapidly rising bilirubin level of greater than 8.5 micromol/litre per hour  
• clinical features of acute bilirubin encephalopathy. 
 
 
Research recommendation 
National registries are needed of cases of significant hyperbilirubinaemia, kernicterus and 
exchange transfusions. 
Why this is important 
Evidence: There is good evidence that prospective surveys in the UK and from a national 
Kernicterus Register in the US can help is identify root- causes of kernicterus and acute 
bilirubin encephalopathy. Population: All children with a peak bilirubin level greater than 
450 micromol/litre which is the threshold for an exchange transfusion recommended by 
NICE. Exposure: All maternal, prenatal, peri- natal and neonatal factors. Comparison: Not 
applicable. Outcome: Shortcomings in clinical and service provision to prevent recurring 
themes in kernicterus cases. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
 
 

Factors that influence hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus 
51 
Table 3.1 Comparative studies evaluating risk factors for hyperbilirubinaemia 
Study details Study 
population 
Risk factor 
Family history of 
jaundice 
GA < 38 weeks or 
early gestation 
Sex Race Exclusive 
breastfeeding 
Early clinical 
jaundice 
Severity of 
jaundice 
Bruising or cephalo-
haematoma 
Delivery 
characteristics 
Maternal 
characteristics 
Newman et al. 
(2000)9 
[EL II] 
BW ≥ 2000 g 
and GA 
≥ 36 weeks 
OR 6.0 (1.0–36.0) GA per week: OR 0.6 
(0.4–0.7) 
Male 
sex: NS 
Asian 
race: 
OR 3.1 
(1.5–6.3) 
OR 6.9 (2.7–17.5) OR 7.3 (2.8–
19.0) 
 Bruising: OR 3.5 (1.7–
7.4) 
Cephalohaematoma: 
OR 3.2 (1.1–9.2) 
Vacuum delivery: 
NS 
Maternal age 
≥ 25 years: OR 2.6 
(1.1–9.2) 
Newman et al. 
(2002)10 
[EL II] 
BW ≥ 2000 g 
and GA 
≥ 36 weeks 
     RR 2.9 (1.6–
5.2) 
    
Kuzniewicz et 
al. (2008)11 
[EL II] 
GA ≥ 34 weeks 
and BW 
≥ 2000 g with 
serum bilirubin 
levels of 291–
392 micromol/litr
e at ≥ 48 hours 
of age 
OR 3.8 (0.9–15.7) 
NS 
For 34–37 weeks: 
OR 3.7 (0.6–22.7) 
For 38–39 weeks: 
OR 3.1 (1.2–8.0) 
40 weeks as reference 
Male 
sex: NS 
Asian and 
African 
American 
race: NS 
OR 2.0 (1.03–4.0) 
Risk after reaching 
qualifying serum 
bilirubin levels 
 Serum 
bilirubin 
increase of 
≥ 102 micr
omol/litre 
per day: 
OR 2.5 (1.2–
5.5) 
Bruising: OR 2.4 (1.2–
4.8) 
Cephalohaematoma: 
NS 
  
Keren et al. 
(2005)12 
[EL II] 
BW ≥ 2000 g if 
GA ≥ 36 weeks, 
and BW 
≥ 2500 g if GA 
≥ 35 weeks 
 GA < 38 weeks: 
OR 2.6 (1.5–4.5) 
Male 
sex: NS 
Asian, 
Hispanic, 
black: NS 
OR 2.6 (1.5–4.5 Analysed 
separately as 
pre-discharge 
risk zones 
Analysed 
separately as 
pre-
discharge 
risk zones 
Bruising: NS 
Cephalohaematoma: 
NS 
Vacuum delivery: 
OR 2.2 (1.5–3.6) 
Oxytocin use: 
OR 2.0 (1.2–3.4) 
Maternal age, 
parity, 
hypertension, 
diabetes: NS 
Seidman et al. 
(1999)13 
[EL II] 
Healthy term 
babies (GA 
≥ 37 weeks) 
Jaundice in sibling: NS  Male 
sex: NS 
Jewish 
ethnicities: 
NS 
Full breastfeeding: 
NS 
Day 1 serum 
bilirubin level 
> 85 micromo
l/litre: OR 36.5 
(15.9–83.6) 
Change in 
serum 
bilirubin 
from day 1 
to day 2 per 
17 micromol
/litre: OR 2.4 
(1.9–3.0) 
Cephalohaematoma: 
NS 
Vacuum delivery: 
NS 
Maternal age per 
year: OR 1.1 (1.0–
1.2) 
Maternal blood 
type O: OR 2.9 
(1.5–5.8) 
Maternal education 
per year: OR 0.8 
(0.7–0.9) 
Keren et al. 
(2008)14 
[EL II] 
GA ≥ 36 weeks 
and BW 
≥ 2000 g, or GA 
≥ 35 weeks and 
BW ≥ 2500 g 
 GA < 38 weeks: 
OR 19 (6.3–56) 
Female 
sex: 
OR 3.2 
(1.2–
8.4) 
Black 
race: 
OR 0.22 
(0.08–
0.61) 
Mother’s plan of 
exclusive 
breastfeeding: 
OR 3.7 (1.1–13) 
Analysed 
separately as 
pre-discharge 
risk zones 
Clinical 
jaundice 
grade 4 or 
higher: 
OR 1.7 (1.2–
2.6) 
 Vacuum delivery: 
NS 
Maternal smoking, 
ethnicity: NS 

Neonatal jaundice 
52 
Study details Study 
population 
Risk factor 
Family history of 
jaundice 
GA < 38 weeks or 
early gestation 
Sex Race Exclusive 
breastfeeding 
Early clinical 
jaundice 
Severity of 
jaundice 
Bruising or cephalo-
haematoma 
Delivery 
characteristics 
Maternal 
characteristics 
Gale et al. 
(1990)15 
[EL II] 
Term singleton 
babies (GA 
≥ 37 weeks) 
Previous sibling with 
jaundice: OR 2.3 
(1.9–2.8) 
For 37 weeks: OR 4.5 
(3.2–6.3) 
For 38 weeks: OR 2.1 
(1.6–2.8) 
40 weeks as reference 
Male 
sex: 
OR 1.4 
(1.2–
1.7) 
     Vacuum 
extraction: OR 3.0 
(2.1–4.4) 
Maternal age 
> 35 years: OR 1.7 
(1.3–2.3) 
Primipara: OR 2.7 
(2.1–3.5) 
Khoury et al. 
(1988)16 
[EL II] 
Both term and 
preterm babies 
Risk of recurrence in 
siblings depending on 
degree of jaundice (in 
micromol/litre): 
Mild (serum bilirubin 
≤ 205): 
OR 2.7 (1.8–4.1) 
Moderate (serum 
bilirubin 205–257): 
OR 4.1 (1.5–10.8) 
Severe (serum 
bilirubin ≥ 257): 
OR 12.5 (2.3–65.3) 
         
Maisels et al. 
(2009)17 
[EL II] 
Both term and 
preterm babies 
 For 35 to 
36 6/7 weeks: 
OR 20.79 (2.34–
184.74) 
For 37 to 
37 6/7 weeks: 
OR 14.86 (1.91–
115.38) 
40 to 40 6/7 weeks as 
reference 
  OR 10.75 (2.37–
48.82) 
     
BW = birthweight; CI = confidence interval; EL = evidence level; GA = gestational age; NS = not statistically significant; OR = odds ratio; RR = risk ratio. 
Results from multivariate analysis are reported as an OR with a 95% CI. 
 
 

 
53 
4 Early prediction of serious 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Introduction 
This chapter builds on the work that has been done in recognition and risk factor assessment for 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. A tool or test that could be used to distinguish babies who were 
likely to develop significant, potentially serious hyperbilirubinaemia from those whose jaundice 
would only ever be mild would be extremely valuable in clinical practice, particularly in the 
modern era of very short hospital stays. Tests that have been reported as potentially useful in 
this area in the past include markers of haemolysis and early timed bilirubin measurements. The 
evidence has been systematically evaluated. 
Clinical questions 
What is the accuracy of the following tests in predicting neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia?  
i) u mbilical cord blood bilirubin levels 
ii) t imed serum bilirubin levels 
iii) t ranscutaneous bilirubin levels 
iv) end-tidal CO levels nomograms 
v) r isk assessment 
vi) Coombs’ test 
What is the effectiveness (clinical and cost) of various tests in predicting hyperbilirubinaemia 
and preventing morbidity/mortality? 
 
Since the tests routinely used for recognising /detecting jaundice have also been studied to 
predict hyperbilirubinaemia at a later age, it was decided to conduct a combined systematic  
literature search to answer two questions: 
1. the diagnostic accuracy of tests in recognising jaundice 
2. the prediction of hyperbilirubinaemia at a later age. 
Primary screening of 2840 titles and abstracts from the database led to the retrieval of 148 
papers. 
Altogether, 22 studies 9;12-14;26;26-42  were selected for inclusion in this  prediction chapter. Four 
studies each were included for evaluating the predictive accuracy of umbilical c ord blood 
bilirubin levels26;29-31 and serum bilirubin levels measured within the first 24 hours of age,13;26-28 
respectively. End-tidal carbon monoxide  (CO) levels were assessed in two studies 32;33 with 
different population characteristics and threshold values. Eight studies were grouped together 
under ‘Pre -discharge risk assessment’ since they all evaluated different strategies (serum 
bilirubin, transcutaneous bilirubin or clinical risk factors) during the pre -discharge period, to 
predict subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia. DAT tests were assessed in f ive studies.38-42 
Furthermore, two or more strategies were compared in three of these studies.  
Regarding the effectiveness of these tests, nine studies 43-51 have been included: four evaluated 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurement, 43-46 two47;48 evaluated pre-discharge bilirubin estimation 
and three 49-51 evaluated DAT. No studies were identified that evaluated the effectiveness of 
clinical assessment, risk index scoring, umbilical cord blood bilirubin or corrected end- tidal 
carbon monoxide (ETCOc) measurement. 

Neonatal jaundice 
54 
4.1 Tests that predict hyperbilirubinaemia 
Serum bilirubin levels in the first 24 hours of life (serum bilirubin–day 1) 
Description of included studies 
One EL Ib study 27 and three  EL II studies 13;26;28 have been included. They were conducted in 
Spain,26 India,27 Turkey28 and Israel. 13 The study population in three studies 13;26;28 included 
healthy term babies (≥  37 weeks) and serum bilirubin was measured within 24 hours of birth. 
The Indian study 27 included healthy babies with gestational age  > 35 weeks and serum 
bilirubin was measured at 24 ± 6 hours of age. In three studies ,26-28 the ability of serum 
bilirubin–day 1 (threshold value ≥  102 micromol/litre) to predict hyperbilirubinaemia (defined 
as serum bilirubin ≥ 290 micromol/litre on day 3– 5) was calculated, and results from these 
studies were pooled to obtain the summary results . Since the Spanish study 26 was conducted in 
two phases, data have been given separately for both phases. The fourth study ,13 from Israel, 
used multiple regression analysis to investigate the association of various factors (maternal age, 
education, O blood group, breastfeeding, serum bilirubin–d ay 1 and change in serum bilirubin 
levels) with hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Review findings 
In three studies 26-28 used in the meta -analysis, hyperbilirubinaemia was defined as serum 
bilirubin levels ≥  290 micromol/litre and its prevalence ranged from 2.9% to 12.0%. The 
pooled sensitivity of serum bilirubin–d ay 1 in predicting hyperbilirubinaemia was 94% (95%  CI 
88% to 97%), with values in individual studies ranging from 90% to 100%, and the results were 
statistically homogeneous  (Figure 4.1). On the other hand, there was strong evidenc e of 
statistical heterogeneity for specificity, with the pooled value being 62% (95% CI 59% to 65%) 
and individual values ranging from 46% to 71% (Figure 4.2).  
The study13 from Israel showed serum bilirubin value > 85 micromol/litre on day 1 to have a 
sensitivity of 63% and specificity of 94%, while the model with all other variables (except 
serum bilirubin on day 1) showed 58% sensitivity and 90% specificity. The addition of serum 
bilirubin > 85 micromol/litre on day 1 to the model with all  other variables increased the 
sensitivity to 82% but the specificity decreased to 80%. 
Evidence summary 
Evidence from one EL  1b27 and two EL  II studies 26;28 indicates that serum bilirubin 
≥ 102 micromol/litre on day  1 is a sensitive predictor of later hyperbilirubinaemia. In another 
study,13 combining serum bilirubin >  85 micromol/litre at less than 24 hours with maternal 
variables (blood group O, age, exclusive breastfeeding and education) resulted in an increase in 
sensitivity but a decrease in specificity. 
GDG translation from evidence 
Evidence shows that serum bilirubin >  102 micromol/litre in the first 24 hours of life is 
predictive of serum bilirubin >  290 micromol/litre between days  3 and 5. This supports the 
evidence reviewed in Chapter 3 on risk factors, that visible jaundice in the first 24 hours is a risk 
factor for later significant hyperbilirubinaemia and underlies the recommendation in Table  7.1. 
In babies with light skin tones, jaundice is usually visible at levels of bilirubin 
> 90 micromol/litre.52 Some studies show that the sensitivity can be improved using a model 
combining serum bilirubin with maternal variables. 
The GDG is of the opinion that visible jaundice in the first 24 hours remains an important 
predictor of later clinically important hyperbilirubinaemia. Any visible or suspected jaundice in 
the first 24 hours requires urgent medical review (within 2 hours), which must include serum 
bilirubin measurement and an investigation of the underlying causes (see Chapter  6 on formal 
assessment). 
 

Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 
55 
Figure 4.1 Pooled sensitivity of serum bilirubin levels in the first 2 4 hours of life in predicting later 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Figure 4.2 Pooled specificity of serum bilirubin levels in the first 2 4 hours of life in predicting later 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Serum bilirubin levels should be measured every 6 hours in babies with visible or suspected 
jaundice whether in treatment or not (see also GDG translation for Section 7.1.1). These 
measurements should continue until the serum bilirubin level is stable and/or falling and is also 
below the treatment thresholds in table 1 and treatment threshold graphs (1.5) 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 4.1. 
Effectiveness of transcutaneous bilirubin measurement 
Description of included studies 
Four studies 43-46 have been included in this section. One retrospective study 43 from the USA 
compared the number of blood samples for bilirubin measurement, treatment with 
phototherapy, length of hospital stay and readmission rates before and after implementation of 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurement. The other three studies 44-46 evaluated the impact of 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurement on the need for blood sampling. These three studies are 
described in detail in Chapter 5 on recognition of jaundice. 
Review findings 
A retrospective cohort study from the USA 43 evaluated the impact of pre -discharge 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurement on laboratory bilirubin testing and readmission rate for 
hyperbilirubinaemia within 7 days of initial discharge. All healthy babies born in a tertiary 


Neonatal jaundice 
56 
hospital between August 2002 and December 2003 were included. Since transcutaneous 
bilirubin testing with BiliC hek was introduced in the hospital in April 2003, babies born during 
this month were excluded from the analysis. The study population was divided into two groups:  
babies born in the 8 months before (August 2002 to March 2003), and those born in the 
8 months after (May 2003 to December 2003) transcutaneous bilirubin testing was introduced. 
The decision to measure transcutaneous bilirubin or serum bilirubin was made by the attending 
physician, and Bhutani’s nomogram was used to decide whether to start phototherapy or obtain 
additional blood samples. In all, 6603 babies were included in the study: 6.8% developed 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia requiring phototherapy as determined by the attending clinician. 
No baby was treated with home phototherapy or required exchange transfusion. The two groups 
were similar with regard to gender and ethnicity. There was no statistically significant difference 
in terms of total monthly births or the number of readmissions for hyperbilirubinaemia within 
7 days of discharge. No statistically significant change was observed in the proportion of 
newborns tested by serum bilirubin (31.8% versus 36.7%; P = 0.21) or in the mean number of 
laboratory measurements per baby (1.51 versus  1.56; P = 0.33) after the introduction of 
transcutaneous bilirubin testing. Similarly, no difference was seen in the mean length of hospital 
stay, either for healthy babies or for babies treated with phototherapy. There was a statistically 
significant increase in the total number of bilirubin measurements (transcutaneous bilirubin and 
serum bilirubin) per baby (mean before transcutaneous bilirubin 0.37, mean after 
transcutaneous bilirubin 0.61; P = 0.007). The mean number of readmissions for 
hyperbilirubinaemia decreased statistically significantly from 4.5 to 1.8 per 1000 births per 
month (P  = 0.04), and the number of babies treated with phototherapy per month increased 
from 5.9% to 7.7% (P  = 0.014). The authors concluded that there appeared to be a trend 
towards an increase in laboratory -based bilirubin testing associated with the introduction of 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurement but, more i mportantly, it led to a reduction in the 
number of hospital readmissions for significant hyperbilirubinaemia. [EL II] 
Of the three studies which evaluated the impact of transcutaneous bilirubin measurement on the 
need for blood sampling for serum bilirubin, the BiliChek device was used in two studies, from 
Denmark and the UK, while the third study, also from the UK, used the Minolta JM -102. In the 
Danish study,45 the BiliChek was evaluated both in sick babies in the neon atal intensive care 
unit (NICU) and in healthy newborn babies. The authors used 70% of serum bilirubin limits 
(defined by the Danish Paediatric Society guidelines) as a threshold for transcutaneous bilirubin. 
A retrospective analysis of this transcutaneous bilirubin threshold showed that 35% (178 of 504) 
of the NICU babies and 80% (254 of 317) of the healthy term and near -term babies would have 
avoided blood sampling for serum bilirubin estimation, In the UK study using BiliChek ,44 a 
reduction of 55% in blood sampling was reported if serum bilirubin testing was limited to 
babies with transcutaneous bilirubin levels > 195 micromol/litre only. The third study 
evaluated the Minolta JM-102 in 285 healthy babies > 34 weeks of gestation in a UK setting .46 
In this study a reading of > 1 8 reflectance units was taken as an indicator for serum bilirubin, 
resulting in a reduction of 34% in the number of blood samples taken. 
Evidence summary 
There is lack of good-quality prospective studies evaluating the impact of routine transcutaneous 
bilirubin measurement on clinical outcomes. Results from a retrospective cohort study show a 
reduction in the frequency of hospital readmissions after the introduction of transcutaneous 
bilirubin measurement. However , there was an associated increase in the number of babies 
treated with phototherapy and also in the proportion of babies tested for serum bilirubin, 
although the difference was statistically not significant for the latter. Evidence from three other 
studies suggests that routine use of transcutaneous bilirubin measurement may lead to a 
reduction in the number of blood samples collected for bilirubin estimation.  
GDG translation from evidence 
Low-quality evidence suggests that routine pre-discharge transcutaneous bilirubinometer use is 
accompanied by an increase in the use of phototherapy and a small reduction in the number of 
hospital readmissions for significant hyperbilirubinaemia. Some studies suggest that the number 
of serum bilirubin estimations is reduced, whereas others found an increase in the number of 
these tests. 

Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 
57 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 4.1. 
Pre-discharge risk assessment 
Description of included studies 
Seven studies have been included in this section, six from the USA 9;12;14;34-36 and one from 
Italy.37 Four cohort studies 14;34;36;37 were conducted prospectively and two r etrospectively,12;35 
while one study was a nested c ase–control study.9 Apart from one study 36 with EL I, the studies 
are of EL  II. Two m ain strategies were employed in these studies to predict subsequent 
hyperbilirubinaemia: pre-discharge bilirubin or early bilirubin measurement combined with 
clinical risk factors. Two studies34;37 evaluated the predictive accuracy of pre -discharge serum 
bilirubin plotted on an hour -specific nomogram, while one study 36 assessed pre -discharge 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurements using BiliChek. Clinical risk factors were evaluated in 
four studies,9;12;14;35 either alone or in combination with pre -discharge bilirubin measurement. In 
one nested c ase–control study,9 a risk index model was assessed; in two retrospective cohort 
studies12;35 the risk index was compared with pre-discharge serum bilirubin plotted in risk zones, 
and in one prospective study 14 the predictive value of multiple risk factors was first compared 
with pre-discharge bilirubin (transcutaneous bilirubin or serum bilirubin) levels, and later their 
combined accuracy was assessed. 
Review findings 
The first study, conducted in the USA ,34 evaluated the predictive ability of an hour -specific pre-
discharge serum bilirubin measurement. The study population included 13 003 term and near -
term appropriate for gestational age  babies admitted to the w ell-baby nursery of a tertiary 
hospital over a 5 year period. Pre-discharge (18–72 hours) serum bilirubin was measured as part 
of routine metabolic screening. Babies admitted to the intensive care unit, those with a positive 
DAT, and those  who started phototherapy before serum bilirubin measurement were excluded. 
After discharge, the babies were followed up by home care nurses, who could request 
laboratory serum bilirubin if they had clinical concerns. Based on the pre - and post- discharge 
serum bilirubin measurements in 2840 eligible babies (recorded in epochs of 4 hours for the 
first 48 hours of age, 12 hours for 48–96 hours of age, and 24 hours for age 5–7 days), an hour-
specific serum bilirubin nomogram was constructed. This was divided into zones: high risk 
(≥ 95th centile), high intermediate risk (between the 75th and 95th centile), low intermediate 
risk (between the 75th and 40th centile) and low risk (below the 40th centile). The nomogram 
was used as the reference standard to determine the ability of pre -discharge serum bilirubin 
(measured between 18 and  72 hours of age) to predict subsequent severe hyperbilirubinaemia, 
which was  defined as serum bilirubin level in the high- risk zone ( ≥ 95th centile). For 8.1% 
(230 of 2840 babies), serum bilirubin fell within this zone at some time. In 58 babies (2.0%), 
this occurred after discharge. Among 172 of 2840 babies with pre -discharge serum bilirubin 
≥ 95th centile, 68 had subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia , giving pre- discharge serum bilirubin 
≥ 95th centile a sensitivity of 54.0% and a specificity of 96.2% in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Pre -discharge serum bilirubin ≥  75th centile showed a sensitivity of 
90.5% and a specificity of 84.7%. None of the 126 babies with pre -discharge serum bilirubin 
< 40th centile developed subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia. The predictive accuracy of each risk 
zone was also calculated in terms of the likelihood ratio (LR) for predicting serum bilirubin 
≥ 95th centile. The LR was 14.1 for the high- risk zone (and 54% of babies continued in th e 
same zone), 3.2 for the high intermediate risk zone (12.9% moved up to the high- risk zone), 0.5 
for the low intermediate risk zone (2.2% moved up to the high- risk zone), and 0 for the low- risk 
zone (none moved into the high-risk zone). [EL II] 
The second study, from Italy,37 was conducted in two phases. In the first phase, serum bilirubin 
curves were developed from blood samples obtained at 6 hours of age and then every 4–
6 hours during the day and every 6–12 hours during the night. 438 full term appropriate for 
gestational age  babies without ‘ asphyxia’ and without Rhesus or ABO incompatibility were 
included. Serum bilirubin curves for babies with levels > 12 mg/dl (205 micromol/litre) and 
those with serum  bilirubin > 15 mg/dl (255 micromol/litre) were devised, and the ir percentile 

Neonatal jaundice 
58 
values (for each hour of life) connected to form percentile tracks. Any serum bilirubin value 
exceeding the 1st percentile track of babies with serum bilirubin > 12 mg/dl was ‘trend 12’, 
and serum bilirubin value exceeding the 1st percentile track of babies with serum bilirubin 
> 15 mg/dl was ‘t rend 15’. Trend 12 and trend 15 were taken as indicative of 
hyperbilirubinaemia. 
In the second phase , the nomogram was validated in a prospective study carried out at two 
hospitals ( Hospital A, n = 1244; H ospital B, n = 498). The study population included term 
babies who had serum bilirubin measured between 30 and 72 hours because of clinical 
jaundice. Most of the babies had a single serum bilirubin measurement, but 514 of 1244 babies 
in Hospital A and 175 of 498 babies in Hospital B had two serum bilirubin determinations 
12 hours apart. The ability of serum bilirubin measurements exceeding trends  12 and 15 to 
predict subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia was evaluated. In H ospital A, 18.5% babies had serum 
bilirubin values > 12 mg/dl while 8.0% had serum bilirubin > 15 mg/dl. With a single serum 
bilirubin measurement and trend 12 as the threshold, a sensitivity of 99% and a specificity of 
49% were obtained, while applying trend 15 gave 100% sensitivity and a specificity of 75%. In 
Hospital B, trend 12 gave similar results (98% sensitivity and 36% specificity) to Hospital A but 
trend 15 was less accurate, with 88% sensitivity and 78% specificity. Two consecutive serum 
bilirubin determinations accurately identified all babies reaching serum bilirubin levels 
> 12 mg/dl in the two hospitals (100% sensitivity), and all but one baby reaching serum 
bilirubin levels > 15 mg/dl in Hospital B. [EL II] 
The third study, conducted in two tertiary hospitals in the USA ,36 compared transcutaneous 
bilirubin measurement with  serum bilirubin for prediction of hyperbilirubinaemia in a 
multiracial population. The study population comprised 490 healthy babies with gestational age  
≥ 36 weeks and birthweight ≥ 2000 g, or gestational age  ≥ 35 weeks and birthw eight 
≥ 2500 g, and included 59% w hite, 29.5% black, 3.5% Hispanic and 4.5% Asian babies. At 
the time of routine metabolic screening (24–72 hours of age), transcutaneous bilirubin readings 
were recorded from the forehead with a BiliChek device and simultaneously two blood samples 
were taken for serum bilirubin estimation – one at the local laboratory and the other sent for 
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC ) assay. The laboratory technicians, clinicians 
and investigators were all blinded to the transcutaneous bilirubin and serum bilirubin data. 
Paired transcutaneous bilirubin and HPLC serum bilirubin values were then plotted on the hour -
specific nomogram developed by Bhutani et al. 34 Hyperbilirubinaemia was defined as serum 
bilirubin levels ≥  95th centile on the nomogram (i.e. in the high- risk zone). Altogether , 30 of 
490 (6.1%) babies had HPLC serum bilirubin values > 9 5th centile and only 1.1% had serum 
bilirubin levels > 255 micromol/litre. The correlation between transcutaneous bilirubin and 
serum bilirubin values was linear and statistically significant (r  = 0.91; P < 0.001), and the 
values for correlation coefficient were similar when the data were categor ised by race. The 
mean difference between paired serum bilirubin and transcutaneous  bilirubin values was 
8 micromol/litre ( 95% CI −38.9 to 54.9 micromol/litre). For predicting hyperbilirubinaemia, 
pre-discharge transcutaneous bilirubin > 7 5th centile showed a sensitivity of 100%, a 
specificity of 88% and a likelihood ratio of 8.4. None of the babies with serum bilirubin levels 
in the  high-risk zone had a transcutaneous bilirubin recording below the 75th centile on the 
nomogram, while all babies with serum bilirubin levels below the 40th centile also had 
transcutaneous bilirubin values below the 40th centile. No adverse events were reported using 
the BiliChek device. [EL II] 
A nested c ase–control study was carried out at 11 hospitals in a health maintenance 
organisation in the USA 9 to investigate predictors of hyperbilirubinaemia and evaluate the 
predictive accuracy of a risk index model. This study has been described in Chapter 3 on risk 
factors. Information on risk factors was collected by reviewing hospital records and interviewing 
parents. Using bivariate analysis, several clinical and demographic variables were found to be 
associated with an increased risk of hyperbilirubinaemia. They included maternal factors (race, 
age, family history of jaundice in a newborn, vacuum delivery) and neonatal factors (male sex, 
lower gestational age, early jaundice, cephalohaematoma, bruising, breastfeeding at time of 
discharge). These variables then underwent multiple regression analysis to identify independent 
predictors of hyperbilirubinaemia. This was done by including and later excluding cases of early 
jaundice (n = 14) in order to predict hyperbilirubinaemia after initial hospital discharge. When 

Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 
59 
all the cases were included, early jaundice (OR  7.3, 95% CI 2.8–19), gestational age per week 
(OR 0.6, 95%  CI 0.4–0.7), breastfe eding at discharge ( OR 6.9, 95%  CI 2.7–17.5), Asian race 
(OR 3.1, 95%  CI 1.5–6.3), bruising (OR  3.5, 95%  CI 1.7–7.4) , cephalohaematoma (OR  3.2, 
95% CI 1.1–9.2), and maternal age ≥ 25 years ( OR 2.6, 95%  CI 1.1–9.2) were all 
independently associated with hyperbilirubinaemia. After excluding cases with early jaundice, 
similar findings were reported, with two exceptions – history of jaundice in a newborn was 
statistically significant in the second model and black race was not included in it as all the early 
jaundice cases were black. A simple risk index was then developed by assigning points to the 
risk factors (approximately equal to their OR in the second model) that were found to be 
statistically significant after exclusion of early jaundice cases. The accuracy of the risk index in 
predicting hyperbilirubinaemia was good (c  = 0.85). With a threshold risk score > 10 points, 
the likelihood ratio of babies having serum bilirubin levels ≥  428 micromol/litre was 2.2 but it 
increased to 18.8 when a score of > 20 points was used as the threshold. [EL II] 
In the fifth study, from the USA ,35 a risk index score for predicting hyperbilirubinaemia was 
validated, and a subset of this index was combined with pre-discharge serum bilirubin measured 
at < 48 hours for predicting subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia. To validate the risk index score in 
predicting serum bilirubin ≥ 427 micromol/litre, 67 cases and 208 randomly sampled controls 
were selected from a cohort of 53 997 babies using similar study design, case definitions and 
selection criteria to the previous study .9 The baseline characteristics of the 1997–9 8 cohort 
study group were similar to those of the previous (1995–9 6) cohort. After excluding family 
history of jaundice, a modified risk index was developed and it showed accuracy in predicting 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia (serum bilirubin levels ≥  427 micromol/litre) with a c-statistic of 
0.83 (95% CI 0.77 to 0.89). The results were similar to those from the previous study (c -statistic 
0.84, 95% CI 0.79 to 0.89). In the second part of the study, the records of 5706 babies born in 
the same setting over a period of 4 years and who had serum bilirubin measured at < 48 hours 
of age were reviewed retrospectively. A partial clinical risk index was derived by deleting family 
history of jaundice, breastfe eding and bruising, and by substituting scalp injury with 
cephalohaematoma. The serum bilirubin levels measured at < 48 hours were classified into 
age-specific percentile groups (< 4 0th centile, 40th to < 75th centile, 75th to < 9 5th centile, 
≥ 95th centile), and then transformed into hour -specific z scores but subtracting the observed 
value from the calculated median for that age and dividing by the calculated standard deviation. 
Significant hyperbilirubinaemia was defined as maximum serum bilirubin levels 
≥ 342 micromol/litre. Pre -discharge serum bilirubin levels expressed as hour -specific centiles 
showed better accuracy for predicting hyperbilirubinaemia than the partial risk index score (c -
statistic 0.79 versus 0 .69). Within each percentile category there was a five - to fifteen- fold 
increase in the risk of hyperbilirubinaemia for those with a risk index score > 10 compared 
with those with a score > 4. Transforming the pre -discharge serum bilirubin centiles into the 
hour-specific z scores improved their predictive ability (c -statistic from 0.79 to 0.83), but the 
best results were obtained by combining pre -discharge serum bilirubin z scores with the partial 
risk index score (c-statistic 0.86). [EL II] 
Another retrospective cohort study, conducted in a urban teaching hospital in the USA ,12;14 also 
compared the predictive performance of combined clinical risk factor assessment and pre -
discharge serum bilirubin measurement. The study population (n  = 899) and the methodology 
has been described in detail in C hapter 3 on risk factors. The population was the same as that 
used in a previous study36 but for this study it was restricted to the time interval when ≥  75% of 
babies had both samples collected. Out of 996 eligible babies, 899 (90%) were finally included. 
Hospital records were reviewed retrospectiv ely to collect information on risk factors. Their 
a
ssociation with hyperbilirubinaemia was explored by univariate analysis and a risk factor score 
was derived from regression modelling using the factors independently associated with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia. The final risk factor model included birthweight, gestational age 
< 38 weeks, oxytocin use during labour, vacuum delivery, breastfeeding, and combined breast - 
and bottle -feeding. Pre -discharge serum bilirubin levels were expressed as risk zones on the 
hour-specific bilirubin nomogram. Significant hyperbilirubinaemia (serum bilirubin > 9 5th 
centile on the nomogram) was present in 98 of 899 (11%) babies. The predictive accuracy of 
pre-discharge serum bilirubin risk zone (c -statistic 0.83, 95%  CI 0.80 to 0.86) was better than 
the clinical risk factor score (c -statistic 0.71, 95% CI 0.66 to 0.76). By decreasing the thresholds 
of a positive test for the risk factor score (higher to lower score) and pre -discharge serum 

Neonatal jaundice 
60 
bilirubin risk zones (> 9 5th centile to < 4 0th centile), sensitivity increased but neither test 
could predict hyperbilirubinaemia with more than 98% sensitivity without seriously 
compromising specificity (13% for risk factor score, 21% for serum bilirubin risk zone). [EL  II] 
In the last study, from the USA ,14 the predictive accuracy of clinical risk factors, pre -discharge 
bilirubin levels expressed as risk zones, and a combination of pre -discharge bilirubin and 
additional risk factors was evaluated prospectively. Study methodology and population is 
described in detail in C hapter 3 on risk factors. All babies (n  = 812) had pre-discharge bilirubin 
measured before 52 hours of age with daily transcutaneous bilirubin readings from the forehead 
using BiliChek, and these were recorded on the hour -specific nomogram. Bilirubin levels 
(transcutaneous bilirubin or serum bilirubin) were also measured on day 3–5 in all babies either 
in hospital or at home. If transcutaneous bilirubin readings exceeded the 75th centile or were 
≥ 205 micromol/litre, blood samples were taken for laboratory serum bilirubin measurement. 
Both the transcutaneous bilirubin and serum bilirubin readings were expressed as risk zones on 
the hour-specific nomogram. In cases where both transcutaneous bilirubin and serum bilirubin 
levels were measured in the same baby, the serum bilirubin readings were used for the final 
analysis. Information on clinical risk factors was extracted from hospital records, and their 
association with hyperbilirubinaemia assessed using univariate analysis. The variable most 
strongly associated with an increased risk of hyperbilirubinaemia was the pre -discharge bilirubin 
level. As this was included in a separate model, the final clinical risk model included five  other 
factors: gestational age, gender, intended method of feeding, black race and extent of jaundice. 
Using logistic regression modelling, the accuracy of three tests was compared for the prediction 
of significant hyperbilirubinaemia. In all, 6.4% of babies developed hyperbil irubinaemia, 
(bilirubin levels on day 3–5 exceeding or within 17 micromol/litre of the hour -specific AAP 
phototherapy treatment thresholds). The predictive accuracy of pre -discharge bilirubin risk zone 
assignment was not significantly different from that of multiple risk factors (c -statistic 0.88 versus 
0.91). After combining clinical risk factors with pre -discharge bilirubin risk zone assignment, the 
only factors that remained statistically significant were gestational age  and percentage weight 
loss per day. This combination model showed improved predictive accuracy (c -statistic 0.96) 
when compared with the pre-discharge bilirubin levels. [EL II] 
Evidence summary 
Results from two studies with EL II indicate that pre -discharge serum bilirubin plotted on hour -
specific percentile charts (‘ nomograms’) show s good accuracy in predicting subsequent 
hyperbilirubinaemia. The  studies used different threshold values and definitions of 
hyperbilirubinaemia. In one study , two consecutive serum bilirubin readings plotted on the 
nomogram had greater predictive accuracy than a single measurement. Another study with EL I 
indicated that pre-discharge transcutaneous bilirubin plotted on an ‘ hour-specific’ nomogram of 
bilirubin levels generated from a study of healthy babies could predict hyperbilirubinaemia with 
100% sensitivity and 88% specificity. The threshold values for defining hyperbilirubinaemia 
were different for the transcutaneous (≥  75th centile) and serum (≥  95th centile) bilirubin 
levels. Other studies have compared the predictive accuracy of clinical risk index scores with 
pre-discharge bilirubin levels. Their results suggest that pre -discharge bilirubin is more accurate 
in predicting subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia than clinical risk factors alone, but the best results 
are seen when pre- discharge bilirubin measurement is combined with risk factors. A major 
limitation of the evidence is that the hour -specific bilirubin nomogram was devised using a 
small population of babies in a single city, and that babies with conditions such as ABO 
incompatibility were excluded. The nomogram may not, therefore, be applicable to other 
populations of newborn infants. Similar nomograms need to be devised for other populations.  
GDG translation from evidence 
Current evidence suggests that it is possible to identify babies who are likely to  develop 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia  using a  pre-discharge assessment. The GDG considered that 
assessment of risk factors was important. 
Another approach has been based on hour -specific bilirubin estimation. Hour-specific bilirubin 
levels were interpreted using a nomogram such as that devised by Bhutani et al ., but the 
universal application of hour -specific bilirubin estimation could not be relied on as data w ere 

Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 
61 
lacking for babies in the first 24 hours of life and also for those with jaundice due to haemolytic 
disease of the newborn. 
The GDG review of the evidence supports our recommendations, namely that parents and 
carers need to made aware of the risk factors for hyperbilirubinaemia  (see recommendations in 
Chapter 8 on information for parents and carers). 
All those responsible for the care of newborn babies should also be aware of the importance of 
risk factors (see Section 3.1), and should take them into account when examining the baby (see 
Section 5.1) and deciding on management options (see Section 7.1.1). 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 4.1. 
Effectiveness of a pre-discharge bilirubin screening programme 
Description of included studies 
Two studies47;48 from the USA have been included in this section. The first study 47 was a non-
comparative observational study evaluating the impact of the introduction of universal pre -
discharge bilirubin screening and a comprehensive post- discharge follow -up programme . The 
second study 48 was a retrospective cohort study that assessed the effectiveness of a universal 
pre-discharge bilirubin screening programme  on the number of readmissions and incidence of 
hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Review findings 
An observational study was conducted in a large urban hospital in the USA 47 to evaluate the 
effectiveness of an incremental systems approach to the management of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia. The  study cohort included all near -term and full- term babies born from 
1 January 1990 to 31  December 2000 who were discharged from the w ell-baby nursery of the 
hospital. Low-birthweight preterm babies and babies admitted to the intensive care nursery for 
any neonatal illness were excluded. The sample population was 31 059 babies of mean 
birthweight 3318 ± 457 g and mean gestational age  38.7 ± 1.3 weeks. The approaches 
implemented in chronological order were: 
1. selective pre-discharge serum bilirubin measurements (1990–92) 
2. universal serum bilirubin measurement at the time of metabolic screening, with nurses 
having discretion to order serum bilirubin in individual babies on clinical grounds (1993–9 5) 
3. universal serum bilirubin screening along with post-discharge follow-up based on the serum 
bilirubin position on the hour-specific nomogram34 (1996–98) 
4. comprehensive, systems-based management of newborn jaundice (1999–2000). 
The impact of the complete approach was assessed in 2001– 2003. In the systems -based 
approach, all babies had pre -discharge bilirubin estimation (serum bilirubin or transcutaneous 
bilirubin), and follow- up care for jaundice was provided either at the hospital (more than 85%  
of cases) or at home within 24–48 hours of discharge. Other components of the approach 
included lactation support, provision of information and advice about jaundice to parents, and 
close follow -up of jaundiced babies based on their hour -specific bilirubin levels. Clinical 
evaluation for jaundice severity was recommended for all babies at about 4 days of age, along 
with targeted follow -up of at- risk babies at 7 days and 1 4 days. Phototherapy was initiated 
according to the AAP guidelines .19 Adverse outcomes included exchange transfusion conducted 
for severe hyperbilirubinaemia or following failure of  phototherapy to prevent rise in serum 
bilirubin levels during both the pre -discharge and post- discharge period, readmission for 
phototherapy following discharge, and presence of clinical signs of acute bilirubin 
encephalopathy. 
A significant decline in the use of intensive phototherapy and in the need for exchange 
transfusion during the first 7 days after birth was observed following the introduction of the 
systems-based approach. From 1990 to 1998 the incidence of intensive phototherapy use was 
about 4%, but it declined to 2.5% during 1999–2 000 and was 1.3% during 2001–2003. During 
1990–2000, the incidence of exchange transfusion following the failure of intensive 

Neonatal jaundice 
62 
phototherapy was 1 in 1827, and it declined to 1 in 11 995 during 200 1–2003. A similar 
reduction in readmission rates for intensive phototherapy was reported: from 14 per 1000 
babies discharged in 1994 to 5.5 per 1000 in 2001–2 003. No babies developed serum bilirubin 
levels ≥ 513 micromol/litre during the study period, while the frequency of reported serum 
bilirubin levels ≥ 427 micromol/litre was 1 in 15 000 compared with the reported incidence of 
1 in 625 in previous studies.9 [EL III] 
Another historical cohort study from the USA 48 evaluated the effectiveness of a bilirubin 
screening programme in a private healthcare  organisation involving 18 hospitals. The 
programme, started in December 2002, involved measurement of bilirubin in every newborn 
baby, either on recognition of jaundice or before discharge from hospital. Two hospitals used 
BiliChek to measure transcutaneous bilirubin levels while others used serum bilirubin; the 
bilirubin measurements were plotted on the hour -specific nomogram. Any bilirubin level 
≥ 40th centile was notified to the relevant healthcare  provider and the baby managed 
according to his/her discretion. All babies born at gestational age ≥ 35 weeks were enrolled in 
the study. Those born after the initiation of the programme (1 January 2003 to 31  December 
2004) formed the cohort group (n  = 52 483), while those born before the programme started 
(1 March 2001 to 31 December 2002) formed the comparison group (n  = 48 798). Other details 
of the two groups were not given and no comparison was made between their baseline 
characteristics. 
Compliance with the programme  was good – within 2 months of starting it, more than 99% of 
the babies had at least one pre-discharge bilirubin level measured. After the first 3 months of the 
study, the percentiles of the hour -specific nomogram were modified since a large number of 
babies were reported to have bilirubin measurements in the high or intermediate-high zones. 
A significant decline in the incidence of hyperbilirubinaemia was reported after implementation 
of the screening programme . The proportion of babies with serum bilirubin levels 
≥ 342 micromol/litre declined from 1 in 77 to 1 in 142 (P  < 0.0001), while the proportion 
with serum bilirubin levels ≥  427 micromol/litre) declined from 1 in 1522 to 1 in 4037 
(P < 0.005). The incidence of hospital readmission for hyperbilirubinaemia also fell 
significantly, from 5.5 per 1000 before the programme  to 4.3 per  1000 babies after its 
introduction (P < 0.005). The authors concluded that a universal screening programme  coupled 
with evaluation of bilirubin using a percentile-based nomogram can lead to significant reduction 
in the incidence of hyperbilirubinaemia and hospital readmissions for phototherapy. [EL II] 
Evidence summary 
There is no good- quality prospective comparative study assessing the impact of universal pre -
discharge bilirubin testing. Results from two studies with EL  III and EL  II suggest that the 
introduction of universal bilirubin screening is followed by reduction in the number of hospital 
readmissions for phototherapy. The non- comparative observational study also found a reduction 
in the incidence of intensive phototherapy and exchange transfusion, while the retrospective 
study reported a decrease in the frequency of reported serum bilirubin levels 
≥ 342 micromol/litre. 
GDG translation from evidence 
Low-quality evidence suggests that universal pre -discharge bilirubin testing may reduce the 
need for intensive phototherapy and exchange transfusions, and the readmission rate for 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia. These studies did not repor t on bilirubin encephalopathy and 
stated that there were no recorded cases of kernicterus. How ever, the lack of high- quality 
evidence to show that universal pre -discharge bilirubin measurement reduces the frequency of 
hospital readmission, exchange transfusions and bilirubin encephalopathy means that it is not 
possible to make a recommendation on the role of universal pre -discharge bilirubin testing in 
the UK but a research recommendation has been made on this topic.  
 

Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 
63 
Recommendations – 4.1 Tests that should be used to predict significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Measure and record the serum bilirubin level urgently (within 2 hours) in all babies with 
suspected or obvious jaundice in the first 24 hours of life.  
Continue to measure the serum bilirubin level every 6 hours for all babies with suspected or 
obvious jaundice in the first 24 hours of life until the level is both: 
• below the treatment threshold 
• stable and/or falling. 
Arrange a referral to ensure that an urgent medical review is conducted (as soon as possible 
and within 6 hours) for all babies with suspected or obvious jaundice in the first 24 hours of 
life to exclude pathological causes of jaundice. 
Interpret bilirubin levels according to the baby’s postnatal age in h ours and manage 
hyperbilirubinaemia according to threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs 
(Section 1.6). 
Do not measure bilirubin levels routinely in babies who are not visibly jaundiced.  
 
 
Research recommendation 
What is the comparative accuracy of the Minolta JM -103 and the BiliChek when compared 
to serum bilirubin levels in all babies? 
Why this is important 
Evidence: The accuracy of transcutaneous bilirubinometers (Minolta JM- 103 and BiliChek)  
has been adequately demonstrated in term babies below treatment levels (bilirubin 
< 250 micromol/litre). New research is needed to evaluate the accuracy of different 
transcutaneous bilirubinometers in comparison to serum bilirubin levels in all babies. 
Population: Babies in the first 28 days of life. Subgroups to include preterm  babies, babies 
with dark skin tones, babies with high levels of bilirubin and babies after phototherapy. 
Exposure: Bilirubin levels taken from different transcutaneous bilirubinometers. Comparison: 
Bilirubin levels assessed using serum (blood) tests. Outcome: Diagnostic accuracy (sensitivity, 
specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value), parental anxiety, staff and 
parental satisfaction with test and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009  
4.2 Tests that do not predict hyperbilirubinaemia 
Umbilical cord blood bilirubin 
Description of included studies 
Four studies of EL II conducted in various countries (Germany,30 India,31 Denmark29 and Spain26) 
have been included. The study population was made up of healthy term babies in three 
studies,26;29;31 while in the German study 30 the population included healthy term babies who 
were a ppropriate for gestational age, healthy term babies who were small for gestational age  
and healthy preterm babies (gestational age  > 34 weeks). Data from this study30 were extracted 
and analysed separated for both appropriate for gestational age and small for gestational age. In 
three studies c ord blood bilir ubin was measured within 2 hours of birth and the standard 
reference test (laboratory serum bilirubin measurement) was carried out within 3–4 days, while 
in the German study blood testing was done only in those babies who had a Minolta JM -102 
transcutaneous bilirubin reading > 16 reflectance units. A meta -analysis was conducted with 
data from three  studies26;30;31 that had defined hyperbilirubinaemia as serum bilirubin levels 
≥ 290 micromol/litre. The threshold values of c ord blood bilirubin in these studies were ≥ 30, 
> 34 and ≥ 37 micromol/litre, respectively. In the Danish study ,29 the ability of cord blood 
bilirubin at levels ≥  35 micromol/litre (best cut- off value derived from the ROC curve) to 

Neonatal jaundice 
64 
predict serum bilirubin levels ≥ 200 micromol/litre was calculated. Blinding of the outcome 
assessors was not specified in three studies. 
Review findings 
The prevalence of hyperbilirubinaemia (serum bilirubin ≥  290 micromol/litre) varied between 
2.9% and 9.5% in the three studies, while in the Danish study 20.3% of the babies had serum 
bilirubin levels ≥ 200 micromol/litre. The sensitivity of cord blood bilir ubin to predict serum 
bilirubin levels ≥  290–300 micromol/litre ranged from 22% to 100%, while the specificity 
ranged from 41% to 95%. The pooled sensitivity was 79% (95% CI 68% to 87%) and the 
pooled specificity 60% (95%  CI 58% to 62%), but there was strong evidence of statistical 
heterogeneity for both the pooled results  with I² at 99.3% and 90.5% , respectively(Figures 4.3 
and 4.4). The Danish study 29 showed that c ord blood bilir ubin levels with threshold value 
≥ 35 micromol/litre had a sensitivity of 71% and specificity of 68% in predicting serum 
bilirubin ≥ 200 micromol/litre. [EL II] 
Figure 4.3 Pooled specificity  of umbilical cord blood bilirubin in predicting later hyperbili-
rubinaemia 
Figure 4.4 Pooled sensitivity  of umbilical cord blood bilirubin in predicting later hyperbili-
rubinaemia 
Evidence summary 
Results from three EL II studies indicate great variation in the ability of c ord blood bilir ubin to 
predict hyperbilirubinaemia in healthy term and preterm babies. Sensitivity ranged from 22%  to 
100% and specificity from 41% to 95%. The pooled sensitivity and specificity were 79% and 
60%, respectively, but the results were marred by strong evidence of statistical heterogeneity.  
The remaining study had a sensitivity of 71% and specificity of 68% in predicting serum 
bilirubin ≥ 200 micromol/litre. 


Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 
65 
GDG translation from evidence 
Current evidence does not support measuring umbilical cord blood bilirubin levels for the 
prediction of subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia in healthy babies. 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 4.2. 
End-tidal carbon monoxide measurement (ETCOc) 
Description of included studies 
Two studies 32;33 with EL II have been included in this section. The first study 32 had a large 
sample size of both term and near -term babies while the second, smaller, study 33 included only 
term babies. In both studies, ROC curves were developed to evaluate the accuracy of end- tidal 
carbon monoxide (CO) production corrected for ambient CO (ETCOc) in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Review findings 
The first study was an international study 32 carried out at nine  sites ( four in the USA, two in 
China, two in Israel and one in Japan). All newborn babies with gestational age  ≥ 35 weeks 
were enrolled in the first 36 hours of life. Of the  1895 babies enrolled, 1370 (72%) completed 
the study. All babies had measurements of ETCOc and serum bilirubin performed at 
30 ± 6 hours, and serum bilirubin only at 96 ± 12 hours. Between these times, serum bilirubin 
could be measured for clinical reasons. ETCOc was measured using a breath ana lyser with 
single-use disposable nasal sampler. Hyperbilirubinaemia was defined as laboratory serum 
bilirubin ≥ 95th centile at any time during the study period. Threshold centile values were 
taken as those defined by Bhutani et al.34 and adopted by the AAP. 19 Inclusion and exclusion 
criteria were well defined. Babies with age -specific serum bilirubin ≥  95th centile at up to 
96 ± 12 hours were withdrawn from the study. About 9% (120 of 1370) of babies had serum 
bilirubin levels ≥  95th centile at 30 ± 6 hours or at 96 ± 12 hours. The mean ETCOc levels in 
this group were statistically significantly higher  than the mean levels in the non-
hyperbilirubinaemic group (P  < 0.001). Logistic regression analysis was conducted with 
variables found to be associated with hyperbilirubinaemia (serum bilirubin percentile at 
30 hours, bruising, maternal blood type, race , maternal diabetes, feeding type, gravidity and 
ETCOc). Models to evaluate diagnostic accuracy of ETCOc, laboratory serum bilirubin and their 
combination in predicting hyperbilirubinaemia were developed. ETCOc at 30 ± 6 hours with a 
threshold value above the population mean (1.48 ± 0.49 ppm) predicted hyperbilirubinaemia 
with 13% positive predictive value (PPV) and 96% negative predictive value (NPV), while 
laboratory serum bilirubin levels > 7 5th centile showed 17% PPV and 98% NPV. When both 
tests were comb ined, NPV increased to 99% but PPV decreased to only 6%. It was concluded 
that serum bilirubin measurement before discharge (at 30 ± 6 hours) may provide some 
assistance in predicting risk of hyperbilirubinaemia, but the addition of ETCOc does not 
improve its predictive accuracy. [EL II] 
In the second study, from Japan, 33 ETCOc levels were measured every 6 hours during the first 
3 days of life in 51 healthy, full- term babies. The Minolta JM -102 was used to record 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurements every 12 hours during the first 5 days and serum 
bilirubin levels were measured if the JM -102 index was ≥  22 reflectance units. An ROC curve 
was developed to evaluate the accuracy of ETCOc at different ages in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia, which was defined as serum bilirubin ≥ 257 micromol/litre. 
Hyperbilirubinaemia occurred in seven  babies, while 44 babies had serum bilirubin levels 
< 257 micromol/litre. There were no statistically significant differences between the 
hyperbilirubinaemic and non- hyperbilirubinaemic babies in terms of sex, gestational age, mode 
of delivery, Apgar score at 1 minute, age at peak transcutaneous bilirubin, or  mode of feeding. 
Moreover, the mean levels of ETCOc were similar for the two groups from 6 to 36 hours of age, 
but the hyperbilirubinaemic group had higher mean levels at 42, 48, 54 and 66 hours. The ROC 
curve indicated that ETCOc at 42 hours of age showed the best accuracy in predicting 

Neonatal jaundice 
66 
hyperbilirubinaemia. At the threshold value of 1.8 ppm, it showed 86% sensitivity, 80% 
specificity, 40% PPV and 97% NPV. [EL II] 
Evidence summary 
ETCOc levels were measured at various  times and their accuracy evaluated with various  
threshold values in two studies with EL  II. While one study reported ETCOc to have a PPV of 
40% and NPV of 97%, the other study reported 13% PPV and 96% NPV for subsequent 
hyperbilirubinaemia. The second study also found no additional benefit from combining this 
test with pre-discharge laboratory serum bilirubin levels. 
GDG translation from evidence 
Although ETCOc shows good negative predictive value, it is not routinely available and does 
not accurately predict neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 4.2. 
Umbilical cord direct antiglobulin (Coombs’) test (DAT) 
Description of included studies 
One study41 with EL  II and four EL III studies 38-40;42 from the USA 41;42, Norway,38 Taiwan40 and 
Turkey39 examining the predictive ability of the DAT have been included but no meta -analysis 
was possible as the studies used different criteria for defining hyperbilirubinaemia.  
Review findings 
In the first study, from the USA,41 universal DAT was evaluated with reference to ETCOc, and its 
accuracy in predicting hyperbilirubinaemia was then assessed. The study population included 
660 babies (mean gestational age  38.9 ± 1.4 weeks, mean birthweight 3267 ± 480 g) admitted 
consecutively to the postnatal ward of a tertiary hospital. In all cases , cord blood was collected 
and DAT was conducted by the gel test. In positive cases , the baby was investigated for 
haemolytic disease. The reference standard for haemolysis was  ETCOc measured in all babies at 
12 ± 6 hours and again at 24 ± 6 hours. Significant haemolysis was defined as ETCOc ≥ 95th 
centile. Since maternal cigarette smoking was shown to influence ETCOc , measurement results 
were given separately for babies of non- smoking and smoking mothers. Bilirubin measurement 
(transcutaneous bilirubin in the majority with subsequent serum bilirubin if required) was 
performed in all babies at the time of hospital discharge or earlier if clinically indicated. 
Hyperbilirubinaemia was defined as a bilirubin reading ≥ 75th centile on the Bhutani 
nomogram. Blinding of outcome assessors was not specified. More than 80% of the study 
population was black. The DAT was positive in 3.5% of babies (23 of 659). In babies of non-
smoking mothers, DAT could predict haemolysis (ETCOc levels ≥ 3.2 microlitre/litre) with a 
sensitivity of 38.5% and specificity of 98.5%, while in babies of all mothers it showed a 
sensitivity of 8.5% and specificity of 97.6% in detecting haemolysis (ETCOc levels 
≥ 2.5 microl/litre). The accuracy of DAT in predicting hyperbilirubinaemia was evaluated and 
compared with that of high ETCOc levels. A positive DAT showed a sensitivity of 14.7% while 
ETCOc showed 27.9% sensitivity in predicting subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia in babies of 
non-smoking mothers. The specificity of DAT compared with ETCOc was 98.2% and 97.9% , 
respectively. [EL II] 
The second study, from the USA ,42 evaluated selective DAT and cord blood bilir ubin 
measurement in predicting hyperbilirubinaemia. The study population included 91 ABO 
incompatible babies in a state -sponsored neonatal programme ; Rhesus incompatible babies 
were excluded. Demographic information on gestational age , birthweight, gender and ethnicity 
was not provided. Cord blood was obtained from all babies of group O mothers, and bilirubin 
estimations were carried out at 12, 24, 36 and 48 hours of life in cases of ABO incompatibility. 
The cord blood bilir ubin threshold for a positive test was a measurement > 68 micromol/litre. 
Babies with serum bilirubin levels > 273 micromol/litre between 12 and 36 hours were classed 
as severely hyperbilirubinaemic. Blinding of outcome assessors was not specified. DAT was 

Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 
67 
positive in 34.1% of babies  (31 of 91). A positive DAT and the c ord blood bilir ubin threshold 
≥ 68 micromol/litre both showed a sensitivity of 92.3% in predicting subsequent severe 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Specificities for both positive DAT and c ord blood bilir ubin tests were 
75.6% and 100%, respectively. [EL III] 
A Norwegi an study 38 examined the ability of universal DAT testing to predict the need for 
phototherapy, using the Hillingdon Hospital bilirubin chart 53 to inform treatment. The study 
population included 2463 babies born in a general hospital. Exclusion criteria included high-
risk deliveries and severe neonatal illness but no more details were given. Information on 
gestational age, birthweight, gender and ethnicity was not provided. Phototherapy was started in 
term babies at serum bilirubin > 350 micromol/litre at > 72 hours and > 250 micromol/litre 
at > 120 hours. Blinding of outcome assessors was not specified. DAT was positive in 4.1%  of 
babies (100 of 2463). The DAT test showed a sensitivity of 14.4% and specificity of 96.6% in 
predicting the need for phototherapy. [EL III] 
A Taiwanese study 40 evaluated selective DAT testing and c ord blood bilir ubin as predictors of 
hyperbilirubinaemia. The study population included 88 babies with birthweight > 2 500 g born 
to group O, Rhesus-positive mothers; 53 babies were ABO incompatible. Information on 
ethnicity, gestational age and gender was not provided. Serum bilirubin levels were measured 
daily for 1 week. Hyperbilirubinaemia was defined as serum bilirubin > 255 micromol/litre 
within 96 hours of birth and/or early jaundice with serum bilirubin > 171 micromol/litre within 
24 hours of birth. Blinding  of outcome assessors was not specified. DAT was positive in 26% 
(14 of 53). The DAT test and the c ord blood bilir ubin threshold level > 68 micromol/litre 
showed sensitivity of 45 % and 41% in predicting subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia. The 
specificity for the DAT and cord blood bilirubin tests was 96% and 100%, respectively. [EL III] 
A Turkish study39 examined selective DAT to predict serum bilirubin levels at 6, 30, 54, 78 and 
102 hours. All babies > 38 weeks of gestation with blood groups A or B born to mothers with 
blood group O, without a simultaneous Rhesus blood factor incompatibility, were included  
(n = 150). The mean birthweight was 3212 ± 415 g and 51% were male. Ethnicity was not 
specified. No exclusion criteria were specified but data from 14 babies were excluded from the 
final analysis for clinical reasons (transferred to intensive care or no informed consent given). 
Severe hyperbilirubinaemia was defined as serum bilirubin > 85 micromol/litre with an 
increase of 8.5 micromol/litre per hour in the first 24 hours, levels > 205 micromol/litre on 
day 2, > 255 micromol/litre on day  3, or > 289 micromol/litre on days  4 and 5. Blinding of 
outcome assessors was not specified. DAT was positive in 4.4% (6 of 136) of babies. A positive 
DAT showed a sensitivity of 20.1% and a specificity of 100% in predicting subsequent severe 
hyperbilirubinaemia in babies with ABO incompatibility. [EL III] 
Evidence summary 
Each study compared DAT with varying threshold levels of bilirubin. In the EL II study the DAT 
test showed a sensitivity of 8.5% and specificity of 97.6% in detecting ha emolysis. Similar levels 
of sensitivity and specificity in predicting subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia were found in three 
of the other four EL  III studies. Sensitivity ranged from 14.4% to 44.8% and specificity fr om 
95.8% to 100%. The fourth EL III study showed a sensitivity of 92.3% and specificity of 75.6%. 
GDG translation from evidence 
Routine DAT (Coombs’) testing on umbilical cord blood does not accurately predict subsequent 
hyperbilirubinaemia in healthy newborns. 
The GDG appreciates that the current widespread use of antenatal anti- D prophylaxis in Rhesus-
negative women has influenced the interpretation of an early DAT in their newborns. Passive 
antibody transfer commonly results in a weakly positive DAT in the absence of haemolysis. 54 
However, a strongly positive DAT, particularly in a baby of a woman who did not receive anti-
D during pregnancy, should still be considered an important marker of haemolysis and forms 
part of the formal assessment of a baby with significantly elevated bilirubin levels (see also 
Chapter 6 on formal assessment). 

Neonatal jaundice 
68 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 4.2. 
Effectiveness of DAT 
Description of included studies 
For the effectiveness analysis , two studies50;51 comparing selective versus universal DAT and a 
third study49 comparing readmission rates and phototherapy rates for tested and untested babies  
were included. 
Review findings 
A retrospective observational study from the USA 49 studied the effectiveness of DAT testing in a 
sample of births within a 1 year period (January to December 2000). Mean gestational age , 
mean birthweight and gender were not specified; 46% of babies studied were Asian and 36.8% 
were white. Cord blood DAT was performed on 2443 babies of mothers with blood group O or 
Rhesus negative while 2097 babies of mothers with groups A, B, AB or Rhesus positive were 
not tested. The records of all DAT- positive babies were reviewed for information relating to the 
presence of jaundice and serum bilirubin results if measured in the first 24 –48 hours. DAT was 
positive in 193 (7.9%) of tested babies. Phototherapy was used in 36 (18.6%) of DAT- positive 
babies. Data for use of phototherapy in DAT- negative babies w ere not provided. Readmission 
for phototherapy was needed for 26 (1.1%) of all DAT- tested babies, and for 19 (0.9%) of 
untested babies. This difference was not statistically significant (OR 1.17, 95% CI 0.65 to 2.13). 
[EL III] 
A cohort study from a tertiary centre in the USA 51 compared universal with  selective newborn 
cord blood testing. In the retrospective cohort group, all cord blood specimens received by the 
blood bank in 1989 were tested while in the prospective cohort group selective testing (all 
babies in intensive care, babies with clinical jaundice, babies of Rhesus-negative mothers and/or 
positive maternal antibody screening, maternal blood group unknown) was carried out on 
admissions between July 1990 and June 1991. Of the retrospective cohort, 2253 of 4003 
eligible babies (56.3%) were tested. Of the prospective cohort, 1048 of 4498 babies (23.3% ) 
were tested selectively. Cord blood collection difficulties and specimen handling problems were 
given as reasons for the  1750 missing test results in the retrospective sample. Fifteen babies 
were readmitted for hyperbilirubinaemia in both study  periods. The prevalence of DAT positive 
tests was not specified. The rate of readmission for hyperbilirubinaemia was 0.4% (15 of 4003) 
among universally tested babies and 0.3% (15 of 4498) among selectively tested babies. This 
difference was not statistically significant (OR 1.12, 95% CI 0.56 to 2.30). [EL III] 
A third study from the USA 50 also examined the effectiveness of universal versus selective DAT 
testing. A retrospective analysis of all records for 1990 and 1991 was carried out to identify 
babies of group O, Rhesus-positive mothers. Altogether, 301 babies with a mean gestational age  
of 39.4 weeks and mean birthweight of 3343.6 g were included; 50.5% were male, 44.5% were 
white and 16.3% were black. Of 113 babies tested, 29 (26%) were ABO incompatible and 14 
(12%) were DAT positive. A total of 188 babies were not tested routinely. Of these, 34 (18 %) 
had DAT tests requested by their treating doctor; 18 (9.6% were ABO incompatible and 13 
(6.9%) were DAT positive. The overall prevalence of DAT positivity was 9.0% (27 of 301 
babies). Phototherapy was used in four  of 113 universally tested babies (3.5 %) and eight of 188 
selectively tested babies (4.3%). The OR was 0.83 (95%  CI: 0.24 to 2.81). The rate of 
readmission for phototherapy was 1.8% (two of 113) among universally tested babies and 0.5% 
(one of 188). Again, this difference was not statistically significant (OR  1.12, 95%  CI 0.56 to 
2.30). [EL III] 
Evidence summary 
Three EL III studies using undefined criteria for readmission for hyperbilirubinaemia were 
included. Two studies compared universal versus selective D AT testing and one compared 
DAT-tested and DAT- untested cohorts. No statistically significant difference was found in the 
readmission rates or phototherapy rates between those undergoing universal testing and those 

Early prediction of serious hyperbilirubinaemia 
69 
tested selectively. In the t hird study , readmission rates for phototherapy among DAT- tested 
babies were 1.1% and among untested babies were 0.9%. 
GDG translation from evidence 
There is no good -quality prospective comparative study assessing the impact of universal DAT. 
EL III studies found no significant difference between universal and selective screening or 
between babies who received a DAT and those who had not received the test.  
 
Recommendation – 4.2 Tests that do not predict significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
Do not use any of the following to predict significant hyperbilirubinaemia  
• umbilical cord blood bilirubin level 
• end-tidal carbon monoxide (ETCOc) measurement 
• umbilical cord blood direct antiglobulin test (DAT) (Coombs’ test). 
 

 
70 
5 Recognition 
Introduction 
This chapter addresses the problem of recognition of jaundice  and discusses visual assessment 
and the measurement of jaundice. Although bilirubin causes yellow discolouration of the skin, 
the whites of the eyes and the palate, detection of this discolouration can be surpr isingly 
difficult. Even babies with very pale skin can appear ‘ suntanned’ rather than yellow, and 
detection of jaundice in babies with dark skin tones can be almost impossible. In jaundice 
caused by liver disease , the total bilirubin level is variable. Sometimes a baby may not be 
obviously jaundiced yet ha ve a serious, potentially lethal disease. In babies with liver disease , 
the degree of jaundice does not correlate with the severity of the liver disease. Traditional 
teaching on examination for jaundice has recommended ‘ blanching’ a small area of skin (often 
on the nose) by pressing it, and inspecting at the whites of the eyes and palate. Jaundice is 
thought to spread from the head to the toes in a ‘cephalo-caudal’ progression. The ‘zones of 
Kramer’52 attempt to quantify this progression. This review of the evidence is a crucial part of the 
guideline, because if babies are not recognised to be jaundiced in the first place they cannot  
enter the care pathway. 
Clinical question 
What is the accuracy of various tests (clinical history and examination, urine/stool 
examination, icterometer and transcutaneous bilirubin levels ) in recognising neonatal 
jaundice or hyperbilirubinaemia? 
For answering the question on diagnostic accuracy of various tests in the recognition of jaundice 
or detection of its severity, these studies were reviewed against the following pre defined criteria: 
● prospective studies 
● diagnostic accuracy of the test or its correlation evaluated against the reference standard 
(serum bilirubin levels) 
● test and the reference test performed within 1 hour of each other. 
As in Chapter 4, the primary screening of 2840  titles and abstracts from the database led to  the 
retrieval of 148 papers.  
A total of 30 studies have been included in this review. Except for four studies with quality EL I 
(one on visual inspection and three on transcutaneous bilirubin measurement with BiliChek) 
and six studies with EL III, the rest of the studies are of EL II, with the main reason for 
downgrading their quality being the absence or non- reporting of blinding among the 
test/reference test operators. Only one study was identified on the diagnostic accuracy of urine 
or stool examination and limited evidence was available for the icterometer. As few diagnostic 
accuracy studies had been carried out in preterm and dark -skinned babies, the selection criteria 
were relaxed in studies related to these populations. Diagnostic accuracy of three devices used 
for transcutaneous bilirubin measurements ( Minolta JM-102, Minolta JM -103 and BiliChek ) has 
been reviewed. 
 
Most of the studies have reported the correlation coefficient (r ) of the test results with the serum 
bilirubin values. This statistical measure indicates a degree of association between the two tests, 
but it is largely dependent on the distribution of serum bilirubin values in the sample population 
and does not adjust for various biases. Efforts were made to convert the unit of bilirubin 
measurement from mg/dl to micromol/litre  (1 mg/dl = 17.1 micromol/litre) and present the 
diagnostic accuracy results in terms of sensitivity and specificity where the data were sufficient. 
Meta-analysis was performed to calculate the diagnostic accuracy of the Minolta JM-102 and JM-
103 using the statistical programme Meta -DiSc (www.hrc.es/investigacion/metadisc_en.htm). As 

Recognition 
71 
the reported thresholds of transcutaneous bilirubin levels in the included studies were variable, 
results were pooled using the summary ROC curve analysis and the a rea under the ROC curve 
(AROC) was calculated. In order to obtain a baseline test performance value for the various 
tests, their sensitivity and specificity were also pooled using the random effects model. 
5.1 Visual/clinical examination 
5.1.1 Examining the baby 
Description of included studies 
Seven studies55-61 have been included in this section. Three studies 57;59;60 were carried out in the 
USA and two each in Israel 58;61 and Switzerland.55;56 All the studies evaluated the correlation of 
clinical assessment of jaundice by experienced healthcare professionals, while one study 57 also 
evaluated parental assessment. Six studies55-58;60;61 were conducted in a hospital setting and one59 
in a community setting. One study61 was of EL I and the remaining six55-60  were of EL II. 
Review findings 
In the first study, from Israel, 61 1129 term and late preterm babies of Jewish (73%) and Arab 
(26%) ethnicity were  clinically assessed for jaundice by experienced clinicians (five  
neonatologists and 17 nurses) in a hospital. All the babies were examined by the observers for 
cephalo-caudal progression of jaundice, and they were unaware of the serum bilirubin levels 
that were collected simultaneously at the time of visual inspection. The clinical assessment 
(called ‘BiliEye’) and serum bilirubin values were grouped into risk zones according to a 
nomogram developed by Bhutani et al .,34 and the ability of BiliEye to detect significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia (defined as zones C  and D on the nomogram) was ana lysed by calculating 
the area under the ROC curve. 
Although BiliEye and serum bilirubin values were moderately positively correlated (r  = 0.75; 
P < 0.001), there was generally a poor agreement between the different observers (κ  = 0.363) 
for the degree of clinical jaundice. Visual assessment also led to a high false -negative rate, that 
is, a large number of babies were misclassified into either the lower or higher risk zones and 
61.5% (67 of 109) of babies with serum bilirubin in the high- risk zones (zones C  and D on the 
nomogram) were clinically misclassified as being in the lower risk zones. Moreover , 8.1% (230 
of 2857) of babies with clinical estimation determined to be in zone  A had serum bilirubin 
values in the higher risk zones (zone B, C or D), indicating that BiliEye readings in the low -risk 
zone had an NPV of 92% in ruling out serum bilirubin values in the higher risk zones. The area 
under the ROC curve plotted for the high- risk zones C  and D was 0.82. After adjusting for  
postpartum age and gestational age, the best results for the diagnostic accuracy of BiliEye to 
detect significant hyperbilirubinaemia were seen when the observations were made after 
60 hours of age in babies ≥  37 weeks gestational age (AROC = 0.93). The results were poor for 
observations made before 36 hours of age (AROC  = 0.64) and in babies born at less than 
37 weeks gestational age (AROC = 0.61). [EL I] 
The second study was conducted in an urban public hospital in the USA .60 The sample 
population comprised 122 healthy full0te rm babies with jaundice, with a  Rhesus-negative 
mother or with a positive DAT. Two observers (paediatric residents, nurse practitioners or 
physicians) independently recorded their clinical assessment of jaundice in babies for pre -
specified parts of the body, and serum bilirubin was measured within 1 hour of the assessment. 
The clinical assessment included subjective evaluation of jaundice at each site (absent, slight or 
obvious), subjective evaluation of the skin tone (light or dark), and estimation of serum bilirubin 
level based on clinical appearance. Ethnic origins were not recorded. Results of the clinical 
assessment were kept in sealed envelopes until serum bilirubin results were available. Alt hough 
there was good agreement between pairs of observers regarding the baby’s skin tone (κ  = 0.56), 
agreement for jaundice at each site was generally poor (only marginally better than chance), 
with the best agreement seen at the ‘nipple line to umbilicus’ site (κ = 0.23, 95%  CI 0.09 to 
0.38). Linear correlation between the estimated serum bilirubin levels and actual serum 
bilirubin levels was poor but statistically significant (r  = 0.43 and 0.54 for the two groups of 

Neonatal jaundice 
72 
observers; P < 0.01). The presence of visible jaundice between the ‘nipple line and the 
umbilicus’ (i.e. the lower chest) had the  best diagnostic accuracy (among all the sites) for 
detecting serum bilirubin levels > 205 micromol/litre with a sensitivity of 97% but a specificity 
of 19% only. If visible jaundice was absent in the lower chest, it had a n NPV of 94% in ruling 
out serum bilirubin levels above 205 micromol/litre. [EL II] 
The third study was conducted in a community setting in the USA 59 and involved follow -up 
visits by 12 home nurses to babies (n  = 164) delivered in a hospital setting. The sam ple 
population was multi- ethnic: 60% of babies were white, 18% black, 6% Asian, 7% Hispanic 
and 9% were of other ethnicity. Babies who were in the intensive care nursery, had received 
phototherapy, whose mothers were not proficient in English or who lived more than 10 miles 
from the hospital were excluded. The mean age of babies at examination was 6.4 ± 2.5 days. If 
the baby was considered to be jaundiced, nurses obtained blood for serum bilirubin 
measurement followed by assessment in three different ways : clinical assessment using their 
usual method (e.g. blanching skin, looking for jaundice at sclera, nose), judging cephalo- caudal 
progression, and taking an Ingram icterometer reading from the nose. Eighty -two babies were 
judged to have jaundice. The nurses’ usual method of clinical assessment showed the best 
correlation with serum bilirubin levels (r  = 0.61; P < 0.01), while assessment of cephalo- caudal 
progression and use of the icterometer showed lower levels of correlation (r  = 0.47 and r = 0.48, 
respectively; P < 0.01 for both). Only three babies had serum bilirubin > 291 micromol/litre 
and nurses were able to predict the levels in two of them correctly. For detecting serum 
bilirubin > 205 micromol/litre, the presence of jaundice caudal to the nipple line had a 
sensitivity of 76% and specificity of 60%, while an Ingram icterometer reading ≥  2.5 showed a 
sensitivity of 75% and specificity of 72%. [EL II] 
The fourth study, from Israel, 58 sought to determine whether clinical impression of jaundice 
could be used as a primary screening tool for hyperbilirubinaemia in a sample of Jewish (76%) 
and Arab (24%) babies. All full- term babies  ( n = 283) with jaundice were assessed by four 
neonatologists before discharge regarding severity of jaundice (they were asked which 
newborns were clinically jaundice d and to decide on whether to draw blood) and their 
estimated serum bilirubin levels. Laboratory serum bilirubin levels were measured within 
30 minutes. The physicians were unaware of the babie s’ previous history and serum bilirubin 
levels. Their clinical estimates of serum bilirubin were statistically significantly correlated with 
the actual serum bilirubin values but with varying degree of linear correlation (correlation 
coefficients ranging from 0.62 to 0.79). On combining the results of all the four physicians, the 
correlation coefficient was 0.68 (P < 0.001). [EL II] 
In the fifth study, conducted in a newborn nursery in the USA ,57 171 babies over 2 days of age 
were initially assessed for the severity of jaundice by nurses and physicians using both cepha lo-
caudal progression and their clinical estimate. The maternal ethnic origins were described as 
white (50%), black (24%), Asian (13%), Hispanic (9%) and ‘other’ (4%). The assessment was 
done at the time of serum bilirubin estimation but serum bilirubin values were measured for 
only 89 babies. The parents of these babies were then given written and verbal instructions on 
how to assess jaundice using assessment of cephalo- caudal progression, and a researcher used 
the Ingram icterometer to record readings from the nose. Only 11 babies had serum bilirubin 
values above 205 micromol/litre. There was poor agreement between physicians, nurses and 
parents about whether a baby was jaundiced (κ = 0.48 for all the three paired comparisons). 
Parental assessment of cephalo- caudal progression of jaundice correlated best with the serum 
bilirubin values (r = 0.71), followed by the icterometer (r  = 0.57) and the nurses’ and physicians’ 
clinical estima tes ( r = 0.52 and 0.55, respectively). The nurses’ and physicians’ assessment of 
cephalo-caudal progression correlated poorly with serum bilirubin values, the coefficients being 
0.48 and 0.35, respectively. [EL II] 
Two studies55;56 with EL II conducted in the same setting in Switzerland compared the clinical 
assessment of jaundice (Kramer method) and two transcutaneous bilirubinometers (Minolta JM -
102 and BiliChek) with serum bilirubin levels. The population in the first study included 140 
healthy term babies, of whom 66% were white. In the second study the sample population 
comprised healthy preterm babies (n  = 69) with gestational age between 34 and 37 weeks, of 
whom 87% were white. In  both studies, babies with birthweight of at least 2000 g and age not 
older than 6 days were included and evaluated for clinical jaundice at regular intervals. When 

Recognition 
73 
jaundice reached zone  3 on the Kramer scale, transcutaneous bilirubin measurements were 
made from the sternum with the Minolta JM-102 and from the forehead and sternum with the 
BiliChek. Simultaneously , blood was collected for serum bilirubin estimation and analysed 
within 30 minutes. Apart from ana lysing the linear correlation between the three  tests and 
serum bilirubin levels, their diagnostic accuracy was evaluated by measuring the area under the 
ROC curve for serum bilirubin > 250 micromol/litre in term babies and serum bilirubin 
> 190 micromol/litre in preterm babies. 
In term babies, transcutaneous bilirubin recordings using the Minolta JM -102 showed the best 
results in terms of linear correlation and diagnostic accuracy (R ² = 0.82; P < 0.01 and 
AROC = 0.98). Clinical assessment showed variable results for the correlation coefficient among 
the white and non- white babies (R ² = 0.74 by nurse and 0.70 by investigator for white babies, 
R² = 0.71 by nurse and 0.65 by investigator for non- white babies). The AROC for the Kramer 
method was 0.88. It was also seen that a grading of jaundice below  2 on the Kramer scale 
(determined by the nurses) had 100% NPV in ruling out serum bilirubin levels 
> 250 micromol/litre. The second study done on healthy preterm  babies showed similar 
results: Minolta JM -102 showed the best performance with a  A ROC of 0.96 and squared 
correlation coefficient R² = 0.76 (P < 0.001). The BiliChek performed worse than the Minolta 
JM-102 but better than clinical assessment, with AROC of 0.88 and 0.89 at forehead and 
sternum, respectively. Values for squared correlation coefficients and AROC for the Kramer 
method were poor ( 0.22 and 0.73 for nurses’  observations, respectively, and 0.20 and 0.70 for 
the principal investigator observations, respectively). 
Evidence summary 
Evidence from EL I and EL II studies shows that clinical estimation of the degree of jaundice by 
experienced healthcare professionals and nursery staff is moderately correlated with actual 
serum bilirubin levels. The value of the correlation coefficient was much less for the preterm 
babies and babies with dark skin tones c ompared with  babies with light skin tones and term 
babies. In one study , parental assessment of cephalo- caudal progression showed better 
correlation than assessment by nurses and paediatricians. Variable results were seen regarding 
the diagnostic accuracy of clinical assessment in detecting severity of jaundice. In one study , 
visible jaundice ‘caudal to nipple line’ had a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 19% in 
detecting serum bilirubin levels > 205 micromol/litre, while the other study reported 76% 
sensitivity with 60% specificity. Results from the EL  1 study show that visual assessment led to 
more than 60% of babies being misclassified into the lower risk zones on the nomogram when 
their serum bilirubin values were actually in the high- risk zones. Moreover , this study found 
clinical assessment to have poor diagnostic accuracy in detecting jaundice in high- risk zones 
when the observations were made before 36 hours of age and in babies born before 37 weeks 
of gestational age. 
Nevertheless, results from three studies show that if clinical examination carried out on the 
second or third day indicates absence of jaundice, it has high NPV for ruling out the presence of 
hyperbilirubinaemia (Table 5.1). 
GDG translation of evidence 
The experience of the GDG is that it is important to examine the naked baby in good light, 
preferably natural light. Review of the evidence shows that, in most term babies, healthcare 
professionals and parents are capable of recognising jaundice but not very good at assessing its 
severity clinically. 
GDG experience is that jaundice is more difficult to recognise in babies with dark skin tones. 
The GDG recognised that international kernicterus registries and population studies of 
hyperbilirubinaemia report over -representation of babies from ethnic groups with dark skin 
tones. This difficulty may be ameliorated by a careful assessment of all infants including 
examination of sclerae, gums and blanched skin. 
Parents can recognise the head-to-toe progression of jaundice. In one study, parents’ recognition 
of visible jaundice was better that that of clinical staff. 

Neonatal jaundice 
74 
Table 5.1 Negative predictive value (NPV) of low degree of jaundice assessed by visual inspection 
Study details Sample characteristics Timing of 
assessment 
Indicator of absent 
jaundice or low-grade 
jaundice 
Definition of severe 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Results 
Riskin et al. 
(2008)61 
Healthy full-term and 
late preterm babies with 
GA≥ 35 weeks before 
discharge (n = 1129) 
Mean: 
62 ± 24 hours 
(median 
55 hours; 
range 9–
252 hours) 
Clinical icterus assessed 
to be in zone A/low-risk 
zone on Bhutani’s 
nomogram 
(< 40th centile) 
Serum bilirubin levels 
in zone B, C and D or 
in intermediate (low, 
high) and high-risk 
zones on Bhutani’s 
nomogram 
(> 40th centile) 
NPV: 91.9% 
(2627/2857) 
Negative LR: 
0.45 
Moyer et al. 
(2000)60 
Full-term healthy babies 
with BW > 2000 g and 
GA > 36 weeks 
(n = 122) 
Mean age 
2 days (range 
8 hours to 
7 days) 
Presence of icterus in 
lower chest (nipple line 
to umbilicus) 
Serum bilirubin levels 
> 205 micromol/litre 
NPV: 94.3% 
(33/35) 
Negative LR: 
0.15 
Szabo et al. 
(2004)56 
Healthy full-term babies 
with BW > 2000 g and 
no older than 6 days 
(n = 140) 
Excluded: jaundice 
within 36 hours 
Data not 
given 
Kramer zone 2 assessed 
by nurses (data not given 
for zone 0 or 1) 
Serum bilirubin levels 
> 250 micromol/litre 
NPV: 100% 
BW = birthweight; GA = gestational age; LR = likelihood ratio; NPV = negative predictive value 
 
When parents or healthcare  professionals consider that a baby is not visibly jaundiced, this 
assessment is generally reliable in ruling out hyperbilirubinaemia. The NPV of absence of 
jaundice ranged from 91% to 100% in the studies used in the meta-analysis. 
Whenever parents or healthcare  professionals consider that a baby is visibly jaundiced, the 
bilirubin level needs to be measured within hours so the depth of jaundice can be accurately 
assessed and appropriate care initiated. 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 5.1. 
5.1.2  Examining urine/stool 
Description of included studies 
One study62 of EL III from the UK was identified. 
Review findings 
A single non-diagnostic study (project report) from the UK 62 was identified to provide evidence 
for this test. This study reported the results of a community programme conducted in three 
phases in which stool colour charts were used to determine liver disease during the neonatal 
period. In the first phase, parents were asked to record the colour of their baby ’s stools during 
the first 28 days of age. The first phase recruited 109 parent– baby pairs and 5 053 stool 
observations were made. The six most commonly selected stool colours were then combined 
with three pale colours to develop a simplified stool colour chart during the second phase. In 
the third phase, acceptability and specificity of this chart was evaluated among  3629 mothers at 
the time of the first health visitor visit (usually around 1 0–14 days). During the second visit (at 
28 days), the health visitors collected the information and examined the babies. Any baby 
thought to be jaundiced or with a history of passing ‘pale stools’ was referred, investigated for 
the presence of cholestatic jaundice and followed up for 6 months. In total, 127 babies were 
jaundiced at 28 days of age , with the incidence of jaundice in breastfed babies being 9.2% 
(95% CI 7.8–11.0%). Many of these babies had abnormal liver function tests but none had 
abnormal stool/urine colour and none was found to have liver disease. Four non- jaundiced 
babies were reported to pass pale stools (fewer  than three occasions in all), but the y were not 
investigated as stools returned to normal colour and all were thriving at the 6 months follow-up. 

Recognition 
75 
The authors concluded that although prolonged jaundice is common in breastfed babies, serious 
pathology is rare and the combination of prolonged jaundice with persistently pale stools and/or 
dark urine is very uncommon. Hence, referral of babies with this combination of signs should 
be considered necessary and all such babies should be investigated immediately. [EL  III] 
Evidence summary 
No diagnostic  study on the accuracy of urine or stool examination to detect liver disease in 
jaundiced babies was found. A community programme  of EL III reported that although 
prolonged jaundice is common in breastfed babies, these babies rarely have serious liver 
pathology or pale stools/dark urine. No baby was diagnosed with liver disease during the study 
period and hence the sensitivity of the stool colour chart could not be evaluated, but it showed 
a high specificity. 
GDG translation from evidence 
There is no eviden ce to show that the examination of stool colour is helpful in the recognition 
of jaundice in babies. Babies’ stools undergo a sequence of colour changes as part of normal 
postnatal adaptation. GDG experience is that the majority of breastfed babies with pr olonged 
jaundice pass stools and urine of normal colour. (See Section 6.2 for prolonged jaundice.) 
 
Recommendations – 5.1 Visual/clinical examination 
In all babies:  
• check whether there are factors associated with an increased likelihood of developing 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia soon after birth  
• examine the baby for jaundice at every opportunity especially in the first 72 hours. 
Parents, carers and healthcare professionals should all look for jaundice (visual inspection). 
When looking for jaundice (visual inspection):  
• check the naked baby in bright and preferably natural light 
• examination of the sclerae, gums and blanched skin is useful across all skin tones . 
Ensure babies with factors associated with an increased likelihood of developing significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia receive an additional visual inspection by a healthcare professional 
during the first 48 hours of life. 
Do not rely on visual inspection alone to estimate the bilirubin level in a baby with jaundice.  
Measure and record the bilirubin level urgently (within 6 hours) in all babies more than 
24 hours old with suspected or obvious jaundice. 
 
5.2 Devices for measuring bilirubin 
5.2.1 Icterometers 
Description of included studies 
Five studies 57;63-66 have been included – four in term babies 57;63;64;66  including two in dark -
skinned babies ,63;64 and one in preterm babies .65 The studies were carried out between 1974 
and 1998 in the USA ( two studies57;65), Rhodesia,63 Tanzania64 and Turkey.66 The Ingram63;66 and 
the Gosset64;65 icterometers were used in two studies each while the fifth study 57 did not report 
the type of icterometer evaluated. 
Review findings 
The first study, conducted in a community setting in the USA ,57 has already been described in 
detail in Section 5.1.1 on visual examination. The sample population in the study was multi-
ethnic and comprised 164 neonates discharged from hospital. During home visits by the nurses, 
clinical examination and icterometer recordings were done at the time of blood sampling for 

Neonatal jaundice 
76 
serum bilirubin estimation. The Ingram icterometer showed a poor linear correlation with serum 
bilirubin values (r  = 0.48; P < 0.01), and had a sensitivity of 75% and specificity of 72% in 
predicting serum bilirubin > 205 micromol/litre with a threshold reading ≥ 2.5. [EL II] 
Another study, from Turkey, 66 compared the correlation of both the Ingram icterometer and the 
Minolta JM -102 bilirubinometer with serum bilirubin levels. The  study sample comprised 96 
full-term jaundiced babies between 1 and 5 days of age with a mean birthweight of  
3380 ± 419 g. Within 30 minutes of blood sampling for serum bilirubin levels, and without 
knowledge of the result, transcutaneous bilirubin levels were obtained from the forehead with 
the Minolta JM -102 and from the nose with the Ingram icterometer. The results showed a 
significant positive linear correlation between serum bilirubin values and the readings from both 
the Minolta JM -102 (r = 0.83) and the Ingram icterometer (r  = 0.78). The diagnostic accuracy of 
the instruments was also assessed in predicting serum bilirubin > 220 micromol/litre. The 
Minolta JM-102 showed a sensitivity of 100% with 56% specificity, while the icterometer had 
the same value for sensitivity but with 48% specificity. [EL II] 
In the third study, from the USA ,65 varying degrees of jaundice were evaluated using the Gosset 
icterometer on 90 preterm babies in a hospital setting, and compared with serum bilirubin 
values obtained within 30 minutes of the icterometer reading. The instrument was used by three 
observers – two with experience in its use and one with no experience. The mean birthweight 
of the sample population was  1676 g and the mean gestational age was 31.7 weeks; the sample 
was predominately white (95%). The linear correlation between the serum bilirubin levels and 
icterometer readings by the two experienced observers was moderately positive (r  = 0.71 and 
r = 0.75, respectively; P < 0.001), while for the inexperienced observer the correlation 
coefficient was 0.63. [EL II] 
Two studies63;64 with EL III measured the correlation of icterometer readings with serum bilirubin 
values in black newborn babies. In the first study from Tanzania ,64 icterometer gradings were 
recorded in 70 babies (gestational age 30–42 weeks) with jaundice who were admitted to the 
neonatal unit. No exclusion crite ria were defined. Icterometer grading was done by blanching 
the gum, and at the same time venous blood was drawn for serum bilirubin estimation. Results 
showed a significant positive correlation (r  = 0.91; P < 0.001) between the icterometer readings 
and serum bilirubin levels. The second study, from Rhodesia,63 investigated the usefulness of the 
icterometer as a screening test in 55 babies with jaundice. The birthweight of the study sample 
ranged from 1050 to 3925 g, and age at testing varied from 2 to 2 4 days. Icterometer gradings 
were done by a single person who was unaware of the serum bilirubin levels. The results 
showed a highly significant positive linear correlation between the icterometer gradings and 
serum bilirubin levels, with a correlation coefficient of 0.96 (P < 0.001). 
Evidence summary 
Results on the diagnostic accuracy of icterometer s in term babies from two studies with EL II 
were variable. While one study reported a correlation of 0.48 with 75% sensitivity and 72% 
specificity in detecting serum bilirubin levels > 205 micromol/litre, the other study showed 
correlation of 0.78 and 100% sensitivity with 48% specificity in detecting high serum bilirubin 
levels (> 220 micromol/litre). In preterm babies a value of ‘r ’ was reported as 0.71 and 0.75 by 
two experienced observers. There is lack of good- quality evidence in babies with dark skin 
tones. Results from the two studies with EL III indicate high correlation between icterometer 
gradings and serum bilirubin values. 
GDG translation from evidence 
An icterometer can be used to confirm the clinical suspicion of jaundice in term babies but it 
does not provide a reliable measure of severity. For preterm babies, good- quality evidence 
shows a moderately positive association with serum bilirubin levels. Findings from poor -quality 
studies suggest that icterometer readings in babies with dark skin tones correlate well with 
serum bilirubin levels, but  the GDG opinion is that better -quality evidence is ne eded before 
icterometer use can be recommended in either preterm babies or babies with dark skin tones.  
Overall, the GDG concluded that icterometers should not be used. 

Recognition 
77 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 5.2. 
5.2.2  Transcutaneous bilirubinometers 
 Review of devices 
Three devices are reviewed in this section. Since a large number of studies were identified that 
evaluated transcutaneous bilirubinometers, it was decided to include studies with EL II or above 
only. A large number of studies reported the sensitivity and specificity based on the ROC curves 
without specifying exact values and therefore preference was given to those studies which 
reported sufficient data for meta-analysis. 
Description of included studies – Minolta JM-102 
Seven studies 26;46;66-70 are included in this section – one each from Denmark ,70 Turkey,66 the 
UK,46 Spain,26 Saudi Arabia,69 the USA68 and Taiwan.67 The sample populations compri sed term 
babies in six studies, 26;66-70  while in the seventh study 46 both term and near -term babies 
> 34 weeks of gestational age were included. Five of the studies 26;46;66;68;69 are of EL II quality 
with blinding not reported in most while two 67;70 are EL III. Exclusion criteria were not defined 
in three studies .26;68;70 Transcutaneous bilirubin levels were measured on the forehead in all 
studies, while in two studies readings were also taken from the sternum and reported separately. 
Although all studies reported diagnostic accuracy in terms of correlation coefficient and six 
studies reported on sensitivity/specificity of the test for different thresholds, only four studies 
gave sufficient data to be used for meta-analysis. 
Review findings – Minolta JM-102 
The sample size in the studies ranged from 76 to 2004. There was a statistically significant 
positive linear correlation between the transcutaneous bilirubin reading at the forehead and 
serum bilirubin levels in all the studies. The correlation coefficients ranged from 0.76 to 0.93.  
In the two studies 26;46 for which detailed data were not available for meta -analysis, sensitivity 
and specificity were reported separately. One study 46 showed transcutaneous bilirubin (Minolta 
JM-102 threshold value 19.9 reflectance units) to have a sensitivity of 86% and specificity of 
78% for detecting serum bilirubin levels > 249 micromol/litre, while the other study 26 reported 
98% sensitivity and 72% specificity for detecting serum bilirubin levels > 222 micromol/litre. 
Data from the other  four studies 66-69 were pooled to examine the diagnostic accuracy of 
transcutaneous bilirubin readings (with various  thresholds) with the Minolta JM -102 in detecting 
serum bilirubin levels > 220 micromol/litre in term babies. The pooled sensitivity was 85% 
(95% CI 76% to 91%) and the pooled specificity was 83% (95%  CI 79% to 86%) but there was 
strong evidence of statistical heterogeneity for both results (I ² = 78.5% and 92.8% for sensitivity 
and specificity, respectively) (Figures 5.1 and 5.2). In the summary ROC curve, AROC was 0.93 
but a threshold effect could not be seen, indicating further evidence of heterogeneity among the 
included studies (Figure 5.3). 
Evidence summary – Minolta JM-102 
Results from EL  II studies show great variation in the accuracy of transcutaneous bilirubin 
measurement using the Minolta JM -102 at the forehead. The correlation coefficient ranged from 
0.76 to 0.93 in the included studies. Meta -analysis showed transcutaneous bilirubin readings at 
the forehead to have an AROC of 0.93 for the detection of serum bilirubin levels 
> 220 micromol/litre in term babies. The pooled sensitivity was 85% and the pooled specificity 
83%, but again these results were marred by strong evidence of statistical heterogeneity. The 
studies on the Minolta JM -102 were confined to healthy term babies with light skin tones and 
Chinese babies. 

Neonatal jaundice 
78 
Study | Sen [95% Conf. Interval] TP/(TP+FN) TN/(TN+FP) 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Bilgen 1998 | 1.000 0.805–1.000  17/17 44/79 
Karrar 1989 | 0.735 0.589–0.851  36/49 95/106 
Maisels 1982 | 1.000 0.715–1.000  11/11 105/124 
Tsai 1988 | 0.905 0.696–0.988  19/21 141/157 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Pooled Sen | 0.847 0.760–0.912 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Heterogeneity χ² = 13.98 (d.f. = 3) P = 0.003 
Inconsistency (I²) = 78.5 % 
No. studies = 4. 
Figure 5.1 Summary sensitivity of JM-102 in predicting later hyperbilirubinaemia 
Study | Spe [95% Conf. Interval] TP/(TP+FN) TN/(TN+FP) 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Bilgen 1998 | 0.557 0.441–0.669 17/17 44/79 
Karrar 1989 | 0.896 0.822–0.947 36/49 95/106 
Maisels 1982 | 0.847 0.771–0.905 11/11 105/124 
Tsai 1988 | 0.898 0.840–0.941 19/21 141/157 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Pooled Spe | 0.826 0.789–0.859 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Heterogeneity χ² = 41.74 (d.f. = 3) P = 0.000 
Inconsistency (I²) = 92.8 % 
No. studies = 4. 
Figure 5.2 Summary Specificity of JM-102 in predicting later hyperbilirubinaemia 
Figure 5.3 Summary ROC curve for JM-102 in predicting later hyperbilirubinaemia 


Recognition 
79 
GDG translation from evidence – Minolta JM-102 
Forehead measurement of transcutaneous bilirubin using the Minolta JM -102 is more accurate 
than visual assessment for the recognition of jaundice in babies with light skin tones and in 
those with yellow skin tones. 
The Minolta JM-102 is no longer available for purchase from the manufacturers.  
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 5.2. 
Description of included studies – Minolta JM-103 
Of the six included studies in this section, three were conducted in the USA, 71-73 two in 
Thailand74;75 and one in Taiwan.76 The study population in one study from Thailand 75 and one73 
from the USA comprised healthy preterm babies with gestational age < 36 weeks, while all the 
other studies 71;72;74;76 included either term babies or both term and near -term babies. In the 
studies from the USA, the population was multi- ethnic in one study ,71 while in two 72;73 it was 
predominantly Hispanic. No exclusion criteria were specified in two studies .72;76 
Transcutaneous bilirubin was measured at the forehead in three  studies72;74;76 in term babies and 
in one study in preterm babies 75, while the sternum was used as the only site in two studies .71;73 
Detailed data for meta -analysis were available from three studies,72;74;76 but they all reported 
different thresholds and thus a summary ROC was developed. All the studies are of EL  II. 
Review findings – Minolta JM-103 
The sample size in the studies in term babies ranged from 90 to 849 babies, while there were 
196 babies with mean birthweight of 1887 ± 344 g in one study75 on preterm babies and in the 
other study 73 of preterm babies the birthweight ranged from 370 g to 2989 g . All the studies 
showed a statistically significant linear correlation between the transcutaneous bilirubin 
observations and serum bilirubin levels. In the term babies, correlation coefficients ranged from 
0.77 to 0.93 and one study 71  from USAreported variable coefficients for different ethnicities : 
0.95 for white babies, 0.82 for black babies and 0.92 for all other babies. This study 71 also 
reported the difference between the laboratory serum bilirubin levels and transcutaneous 
bilirubin readings in different ethnicities. The results showed that transcutaneous bilirubin 
values over estimated serum bilirubin levels by ≥  51 micromol/litre in 17.4% of the black 
babies compared with 2.0% of white babies and 3.3% of other babies. However , in the other 
three studies in term babies, transcutaneous bilirubin readings were found to underestimate 
serum bilirubin levels by a mean of 12, 74 1776 and 2772 micromol/litre. This discrepancy did not 
increase with a rise in the serum bilirubin levels in two of the studies .72;76 One st udy75 o n 
preterm babies reported a correlation coefficient of 0.79 and reported that the JM -103 
overestimated serum bilirubin levels in the first 3–4 days of life but underestimated the serum 
bilirubin after this age. The second study 73 reported r = 0.92 for gestational age between 24 and 
28 weeks, r = 0.91 for gestational age  between 29 and 31 weeks and r  = 0.82 between 
gestational age  32 and 34 weeks. This study 73 also noted that the JM -103 underestimated the 
serum bilirubin by 19 ± 32 micromol/litre in babies with gestational age  between 24 and 
28 weeks, by 14 ± 22 micromol/litre in babies with  gestational age between 28 and 31 weeks 
and by 17 ± 27 micromol/litre in babies with gestational age  between 32 and 34 weeks. Data 
from three studies72;74;76 in term babies were pooled to calculate the predictive accuracy of the 
device in detecting serum bilirubin levels > 255 micromol/litre when transcutaneous bilirubin 
was measured from the forehead with threshold level > 200–204 micromol/litre. The pooled 
sensitivity and specificity were 85% (95%  CI 78% to 91%) and 80% (95%  CI 77% to 82%),  
r
espectively (Figures 5.4 and 5.5). There was strong evidence of statistical heterogeneity for both 
results (I² = 55% and 93% for sensitivity and specificity , respectively). The summary ROC curve 
showed an AROC of 0.87 but there was variation in the individual study results and it showed 
no indication of a threshold effect (Figure 5.6). 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
80 
Study | Sen [95% Conf. Interval] TP/(TP+FN) TN/(TN+FP) 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Chang 2006 | 0.791 0.674–0.881 53/67 301/380 
Sanpavat 2004 | 0.929 0.661–0.998 13/14 373/446 
Engle 2005 | 0.912 0.807–0.971 52/57 34/64 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Pooled Sen | 0.855 0.785–0.909 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Heterogeneity χ² = 4.44 (d.f. = 2) P = 0.109 
Inconsistency (I²) = 54.9 % 
No. studies = 3. 
Figure 5.4 Summary sensitivity of JM-103 in predicting later hyperbilirubinaemia 
Study | Spe [95% Conf. Interval] TP/(TP+FN) TN/(TN+FP) 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Chang 2006 | 0.792 0.748–0.832 53/67 301/380 
Sanpavat 2004 | 0.836 0.799–0.869 13/14 373/446 
Engle 2005 | 0.531 0.402–0.657 52/57 34/64 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Pooled Spe | 0.796 0.767–0.822 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Heterogeneity χ² = 27.17 (d.f. = 2) P = 0.000 
Inconsistency (I²) = 92.6 % 
No. studies = 3. 
Figure 5.5 Summary specificity of JM-103 in predicting later hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Figure 5.6 Summary ROC curve of JM-103 in predicting later hyperbilirubinaemia 


Recognition 
81 
Evidence summary – Minolta JM-103 
The EL II evidence on diagnostic accuracy of the Minolta JM-103 shows variation in term babies. 
The correlation coefficients between the transcutaneous bilirubin readings and serum bilirubin 
levels ranged from a moderate positive 0.77 to a  significantly positive 0.93. While three studies 
found evidence of underestimation of serum bilirubin by the device in term babies, the fourth 
study indicated overestimation that was much higher in babies with dark skin tones compared 
with those with light skin tones. The AROC was 0.87 but the summary ROC curve did not show 
a curvilinear pattern, indicating heterogeneity in the study results. The pooled sensitivity and 
specificity were 85% and 80%, respectively, with strong evidence of statistical heterogeneity for 
both results. 
In preterm babies the correlation was positive , with values of 0.79 in one study and ranging 
from 0.82 to 0.92 in the second study. The JM -103 consistently underestimated bilirubin levels 
by a mean of 19 ± 32 micromol/litre. 
GDG translation from evidence – Minolta JM-103 
Forehead or sternum measurement of transcutaneous bilirubin using the Minolta JM -103 is more 
accurate than visual assessment for the recognition of jaundice in term babies.  
The evidence from two good- quality studies showed a positive correlation between the JM -103 
and serum bilirubin estimations. The GDG was concerned that the JM -103 consistently 
underestimated serum bilirubin by up to 50 micromol/litre. 
Results from one study (EL  II) showed that the reliability of the JM -103 was lower when used on 
babies with dark skin tones when compared with those with light skin tones. 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 5.2. 
Description of included studies – BiliChek 
Seven studies44;45;77-81 have been included in this section – three77-79 with EL Ib, two44;80 with EL II 
and two45;81 with EL III. The study population comprised term babies in one study ,78 term and 
preterm babies in five studies,44;45;77;80;81 and preterm babies only in one study .79 One study 80 
included African babies. It was not possible to combine the studies in a meta -analysis as there 
were different study populations, different threshold values of transcutaneous bilirubin for 
calculating diagnostic accuracy, and different levels of laboratory serum bilirubin used as the 
reference standard. Hence these studies have been described in a narrative manner.  
Review findings – BiliChek 
The first study is a multicentre  European study77 conducted in six hospitals across five countries 
– the UK, France, Germany, Italy and Switzerland. A total of 210 term and preterm  babies (35 
from each centre) who underwent serum bilirubin measurements as part of normal care at these 
hospitals were recruited as the sample population. White babies made up 66% of the sample 
population and about 20% had a gestational age of 36 weeks or less. A single transcutaneous 
bilirubin measurement was made from the forehead and sternum of each baby using BiliChek 
30 minutes before or after blood was drawn. The laboratory estimation of serum  bilirubin in 
each of the participating centres was done using the laboratory’s routine equipment. A portion 
of the blood sample was also sent to a central laboratory for bilirubin assay using HPLC -B 
without disclosure of the hospital laboratory results. There was a significant correlation between 
the forehead and sternum  transcutaneous bilirubin measurements and laboratory serum 
bilirubin levels (r  = 0.87 and 0.85, respectively; P < 0.001 for both). The correlation between 
the laboratory serum bilirubin and HPLC -B levels was also statistically significant (r  = 0.93; 
P < 0.001). 
The difference between the mean serum bilirubin values and the mean transcutaneous bilirubin 
measurements was not statistically significant at either the forehead (MD  = 2.4 micromol/litre, 
95% CI −2.4 to 7.1 micromol/litre) or the sternum (MD  = −14.8 micromol/litre, 95% CI −19.9 
to 9.5 micromol/litre). An AROC curve was plotted to calculate the diagnostic accuracy of 

Neonatal jaundice 
82 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurements for predicting serum bilirubin determined b y the HPLC-
B method. At the threshold value of 187 micromol/litre, transcutaneous bilirubin had a 
sensitivity of 93% and specificity of 73% for  detecting serum bilirubin > 222 micromol/litre. At 
a threshold of 240 micromol/litre, transcutaneous bilirubin had a sensitivity of 90% and 
specificity of 87% in detecting serum bilirubin levels > 290 micromol/litre. Transcutaneous 
bilirubin measurements showed similar diagnostic accuracy results (sensitivity and specificity) 
for detecting hyperbilirubinaemia (serum bilirubin values from HPCL -B method 
> 290 micromol/litre). [EL Ib] 
In the second observational study, from Malaysia ,78 345 healthy term babies from different 
ethnic backgrounds (Malays 63.8% Chinese 30.7% and Indians 5.5%) were studied to assess 
whether transcutaneous bilirubin measurement using BiliChek could accurately detect s evere 
hyperbilirubinaemia. All babies requiring investigation for jaundice had forehead and sternum  
transcutaneous bilirubin levels measured within 30 minutes of venous blood being collected for 
serum bilirubin estimation. The laboratory technicians were blinded to the transcutaneous 
bilirubin readings. The prevalence of severe hyperbilirubinaemia (serum bilirubin 
> 300 micromol/litre) in the sample population was 27.5% (95 of 345). The correlation 
between the laboratory serum bilirubin levels and transcutaneous bilirubin readings was strong 
and statistically significant for forehead and sternum ( r = 0.80 and 0.86, respectively; P < 0.001 
for both). Minor variation was observed in correlation coefficients for the three ethnic groups, 
with the values ranging between 0.79 and 0.84 at the forehead and 0.86 and 0.94 at the 
sternum. When these data were segregated according to the timing of serum bilirubin and 
transcutaneous bilirubin, the correlation at less than 80 hours of age ( r = 0.85) was better than 
that seen after 8 0 hours (r = 0.71) but 79% of the babies with severe hyperbilirubinaemia had 
their serum bilirubin estimation done after 80 hours of age. 
Forehead transcutaneous bilirubin readings (threshold 250 micromol/litre) had a sensitivity of 
100% and specificity of 39% for detecting serum bilirubin levels > 300 micromol/litre, while 
the values were 76% and 85% at a transcutaneous bilirubin threshold of 260 micromol/litre. For 
sternum transcutaneous bilirubin, the sensitivity and specificity at a threshold of 
200 micromol/litre were 100% and 34%, respectively while at a threshold of 280 micromol/litre 
the values were 93% and 84% , respectively. When the difference between serum bilirubin and 
transcutaneous bilirubin was plotted against the mean serum bilirubin and transcutaneous 
bilirubin measurements, the difference widened markedly from the line of agreement at the 
mean level of serum bilirubin and transcutaneous bilirubin above 25 0 micromol/litre, especially 
when transcutaneous bilirubin was measured from the forehead. Moreover , the areas under the 
curves for different serum bilirubin levels (≥  250 micromol/litre, ≥ 280 micromol/litre and 
≥ 300 micromol/litre) were slightly but consistently larger for the sternum readings compared 
with the forehead readings. [EL Ib] 
In a Danish study ,45 the diagnostic accuracy of BiliChek was evaluated in both sick and healthy 
newborn babies. A total of 488 babies comprised the sample population – both preterm babies 
with gestational age < 35 weeks and sick term and near -term babies in the NICU formed 
Group 1 (n = 261, with mean birthweight 2521 g) while Group 2 was made up of healthy term 
and near -term babies  with gestational age  ≥ 35 weeks in the maternity ward (n  = 227, with 
mean birthweight 3362 g). Exclusion criteria were well defined but blinding was not specified. 
Transcutaneous bilirubin was measured with BiliChek on the forehead, sternum, knee and foot, 
following which capillary blood was drawn for laboratory serum bilirubin estimation. In 
Group 1 babies, the correlation coefficients for serum bilirubin levels and transcutaneous 
bilirubin from the forehead and sternum were high (0.88 and 0.82), while they were 0.77 for 
the knee and only 0.51 for the foot. In Group 2, readings from the sternum showed the strongest 
correlation (0.90), while it was 0.87 for the forehead, 0.83 for the knee and 0.67 for the foot. 
Based on these results, the forehead was recommended as the preferred site for transcutaneous 
bilirubin measurement. Alt hough exact data were not given for Bland– Altman analysis, figures 
from both groups showed that transcutaneous bilirubin from the forehead underestimated serum 
bilirubin levels and this underestimation increased as the serum bilirubin level increased. The 
diagnostic accuracy of transcutaneous bilirubin for detecting serum bilirubin levels, where 
phototherapy was indicated according to the Danish Pediatric Society guidelines 
(www.paediatri.dk/), was also determined. Using a screening threshold for transcutaneous 

Recognition 
83 
bilirubin from the forehead as 70% of the serum bilirubin limit (300 micromol/litre or 10% of 
bodyweight in grams for ill babies and 50 micromol/litre higher for healthy babies), the 
sensitivity and specificity in Group 1 babies was 99% and 45%, and for Group 2 100% and 
81%, respectively. [EL III] 
The fourth study was conducted in the UK 44 in a  regional teaching hospital and included all 
babies in the postnatal ward who were having blood taken for serum bilirubin estimation. A 
concurrent transcutaneous bilirubin reading (using BiliChek) was taken but the site was not 
specified. A total of 300 babies with gestational age ranging from 33 to 42 weeks were included 
in this study. Of these, 18.3% of them had serum bilirubin levels > 250 micromol/litre. 
Significant correlation was seen between serum bilirubin levels and transcutaneous bilirubin 
readings (r = 0.77; P < 0.001). Although the BiliChek underestimated serum bilirubin levels by 
a small value (mean difference − 10.6 micromol/litre), the confidence intervals of the difference 
were wide, r anging from −80 to +60 micromol/litre. This discrepancy was  not found to 
increase with rises in bilirubin levels. With a threshold value of > 195 micromol/litre, 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurements using BiliChek could detect serum bilirubin levels 
> 250 micromol/litre with a sensitivity of 91% and a specificity of 66%. [EL II] 
The fifth study was conducted in Italy 79 to evaluate BiliChek in preterm babies. The s tudy 
population comprised 340 preterm babies with gestational age between 30 to 36 weeks 
admitted to the neonatal unit of a tertiary hospital. The mean birthweight of the sample was  
2145 ± 518 g. The unit followed a policy of daily bilirubin monitoring for  all preterm babies in 
the first 120 hours of life. After randomly selecting one of these observations, transcutaneous 
bilirubin was measured from the forehead about 10 minutes before drawing blood for serum 
bilirubin estimation. All transcutaneous bilirubin measurements were made by the same 
investigator, who was blinded to the serum bilirubin results. The correlation coefficient between 
the two measurements was 0.79 (P  < 0.01). The BiliChek reading overestimated serum 
bilirubin level by more than 8.5 micromol/litre in 61% of the sample (209/340), with a mean 
difference of 18.8 micromol/litre. This difference was found to increase at higher levels of 
bilirubin. The most effective transcutaneous bilirubin threshold values were 111 micromol/litre 
to detect serum bilirubin levels > 171 micromol/litre (sensitivity 100% and specificity 40%) 
and 171 micromol/litre to detect serum bilirubin levels > 205 micromol/litre (sensitivity 100% 
and specificity 72%). [EL Ib] 
In the sixth study, from Nigeria ,80 transcutaneous bilirubin measurements with BiliChek were 
correlated with serum bilirubin values in a group of African babies with varying degrees of skin 
pigmentation. The study was conducted at two hospitals; one in a rural setting and the other a 
tertiary teaching hospital. The study population comprised 127 term and preterm babies with 
jaundice. Transcutaneous bilirubin measurements were taken from the forehead simultaneously 
with blood sampling before phototherapy was started. Skin pigmentation was determined by 
visual observation and classified as light (54% of babies), medium (36%) and dark (10%). 
Transcutaneous bilirubin measurements at the forehead correlated well with the serum bilirubin 
values ( r = 0.92; P < 0.001) when the data were combined from the two hospitals, and the 
mean difference was 8.5 ± 129.2 micromol/litre. When the data were segregated according to 
serum bilirubin, correlation for serum bilirubin ≥  205 micromol/litre was better compared with  
serum bilirubin levels < 205 micromol/litre ( r = 0.84 versus 0.67). At serum bilirubin levels 
≥ 205 micromol/litre, transcutaneous bilirubin measurements underestimated serum bilirubin 
with a mean difference of 21.4 micromol/litre, but overestimated it when serum bilirubin levels 
were < 205 micromol/litre (mean difference of 35.7 micromol/litre). When the data were 
analysed on the basis of skin pigmentation, transcutaneous bilirubin measurements correlated 
strongly with all three degrees of pigmentation. Although the mean difference between 
transcutaneous bilirubin and serum bilirubin readings was small (8.5 micromol/litre), the 
imprecision (standard deviation) increased with increasing degree of pigmentation: 
92 micromol/litre for light, 133 micromol/litre for medium, and 197 micromol/litre for dark 
pigmentation. [EL II] 
In the last study, from the U SA,81 transcutaneous bilirubin measurements with BiliChek were 
compared with serum bilirubin levels obtained by the diazo and the VITROS® methods. The 
study was conducted in a well- baby nursery at a general hospital. The study population 
comprised 177 term and preterm babies with suspected jaundice. Transcutaneous bilirubin 

Neonatal jaundice 
84 
measurements were taken from the forehead simultaneously with blood sampling. The median 
transcutaneous measurement was 209 micromol/litre. The BiliChek overestimated diazo serum 
bilirubin by a mean of 34 micromol/litre and VITROS serum bilirubin by a mean of 
22 micromol/litre. There was a moderately positive correlation between transcutaneous 
bilirubin and serum bilirubin values : diazo (r ² = 0.65) and VITROS ( r² = 0.66) when bias was 
accounted for. [EL III] 
Evidence summary – BiliChek 
Evidence from good-quality studies indicates that transcutaneous bilirubin measurement from the 
forehead using BiliChek correlates moderately well with serum bilirubin values in term and near-
term babies. The correlation coefficient ranged from 0.80 to 0.87. In a study in healthy preterm 
babies it was 0.79 whereas in another study in preterm and sick term babies it was 0.88. 
BiliChek was less accurate at bilirubin levels greater than 250 micromol/litre. Results from two 
studies have reported an increase in the mean difference between serum bilirubin and BiliChek 
readings with a rise in bilirubin levels. One study found the BiliChek underestimated serum 
bilirubin in healthy term and near -term babies while two studies reported overestimation in 
healthy term and preterm babies. Alt ough there were differences in the populations studied, in 
threshold cut- off values of transcutaneous bilirubin and in the levels of laboratory serum 
bilirubin used as the reference test, the sensitivity of BiliChek to detect bilirubin levels was 
generally reported to be high, with variable results for the specificity. In the study on African 
babies, BiliChek readings showed a reasonable correlation with serum bilirubin values but the 
difference between transcutaneous bilirubin and serum bilirubin was greatest in babies with 
darker skin tones. 
GDG translation from evidence – BiliChek 
High-quality research suggests that forehead or sternum measurement of transcutaneous 
bilirubin by BiliChek is more accurate than visual inspection when used to assess the degree of 
jaundice in term and near-term babies with a range of skin tones. 
Good-quality studies of BiliChek measurement in preterm babies show a significantly positive 
correlation with serum bilirubin but there are no studies that report the use of the BiliChek in 
babies with gestational age less than 30 weeks. The GDG considered that, given the lack of 
evidence regarding babies of less than 30 weeks of gestation, they could not recommend the 
use of the BiliChek in very preterm babies. 
BiliChek is less accurate at higher levels of bilirubin and in babies with dark skin tones.  
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 5.2. 
Cost-effectiveness evidence for transcutaneous bilirubinometers 
Alternative testing strategies for hyperbilirubinaemia was identified by the GDG as a priority for 
an economic analysis. The results are summarised below; further details are available in 
Appendix C. 
The GDG considered that there were two alternative testing strategies to ‘ current practice’ in the 
NHS. These two strategies were to either perform a serum bilirubin on all visually jaundiced 
babies or undertake a transcutaneous bilirubin measurement on all visually jaundiced babies, 
with a serum bilirubin measurement on those with transcutaneous bilirubin estimations above a 
certain threshold. They judged that, under their recommended thresholds for treatment (a 
relatively high threshold) and further monitoring (a relatively low threshold), either alternative 
would be equally effective at preventing cases of kernicterus. Therefore, a cost- minimisation 
analysis was undertaken to compare these alternatives. There is insufficient clinical evidence to 
determine whether more intensive testing for hyperbilirubinaemia using one of these two 
strategies would be more cost- effective than ‘current practice ’, in which visual examination is 
often used to determine the severity of hyperbilirubinaemia , with less than 10% of visually 
jaundiced babies having a serum bilirubin. However, there is very good evidence to show that 
visual examination is not reliable in assessing the degree of hyperbilirubinaemia in a jaundiced 

Recognition 
85 
baby. Therefore, it seems likely that a more intensive testing strategy would overcome some of 
the limitations of visual examination, leading to better and earlier detection of cases which 
would benefit from appropriate treatment. A threshold analysis was undertaken to estimate  the 
number of kernicterus cases that would have to be averted in order for the more intensive 
testing strategies to be considered cost-effective. 
The economic analysis suggested that, providing the testing strategy using transcutaneous 
bilirubin measurement could be delivered with fewer  than 9200 meters (without disposable 
tips) in England and Wales, it would be more cost- effective than a strategy where all visually 
jaundiced babies  had a serum bilirubin. The threshold analysis suggested that a minimum of 
1.52 kernicterus cases per annum would have to be avoided in order for more intensive testing 
to be considered cost- effective, but that a smaller number of averted cases could be cost -
effective if fewer than 9200 meters were required. 
Overall GDG translation from evidence (5.2.2) 
Evidence shows that transcutaneous bilirubin measurements help with the assessment of the 
degree of jaundice and are more accurate than visual inspection. Good- quality indirect 
evidence shows that the BiliChek produces more accurate results than the Minolta JM -102 or 
JM-103 in babies with dark skin tones but there are currently no published studies directly 
comparing the BiliChek and the JM -103. The GDG understands that there are differences in the 
design of these devices but is unable to recommend a particular device over another. 
Studies have used the forehead or sternum as the primary site for transcutaneous bilirubin 
measurement, and the results are comparable. The opinion of the GDG is that measurement 
over the sternum is more acceptable to parents and babies. Sternal measurement avoids the 
problem of failing to obtain a reading because the baby wrinkles his or her forehead when 
crying. Measurement using the forehead carries a potential risk of injuring the eye if the baby 
struggles. 
The difference between transcutaneous bilirubin and serum bilirubin widens at levels above 
250 micromol/litre and, as few babies with high levels were studied, transcutaneous bilirubin 
cannot be recommended at levels above 25 0 micromol/litre. If a transcutaneous bilirubinometer 
records a bilirubin level above 250 micromol/litre, a serum bilirubin level should be taken to 
check the bilirubin level accurately. The GDG opinion is that transcutaneous bilirubin should 
not be used in very preterm babies (gestational age  < 35 weeks) because they are more 
vulnerable than term babies to kernicterus at relatively low levels of bilirubin and therefore 
need more accurate testing , and because  the evidence for accuracy of transcutaneous 
bilirubinometers in this group is unclear. The GDG ha s made research recommendation s for 
both the BiliCheck and JM-103 to be studies in these subgroups of babies with jaundice.  
Based on the evidence reviewed in Section 5.1, the GDG is satisfied that visual inspection, by 
parents or clinical staff, is effective in ruling out jaundice but is unreliable in assessing the depth 
of jaundice. The GDG recognises that transcutaneous bilirubinometers are non- invasive and are 
more acceptable than blood sampling. The GDG considers that transcutaneous bilirubinometers 
should be used after 24 hours of age to avoid problems associated with taking and acting upon 
blood samples in the community. However , if transcutaneous bilirubinometers are not 
available, serum bilirubin levels should be monitored and recorded.  
The NICE guideline on ‘ Postnatal care ’ recommends that if ‘ jaundice develops in babies aged 
24 hours and older, the intensity should be monitored and systematically recorded along with 
the baby’s overall well- being with particular regard to hydration and alertness ’ 
(www.nice.org.uk/CG37). The GDG consider s that any healthcare professional can be 
responsible for monitoring and recording the baby’s bilirubin. 
Current practice is to perform serum bilirubin on a small minority of jaundiced babies, and there 
are five to seven  cases of kernicterus each year in the UK. The GDG is of the opinion that the 
current practice of assessing the depth of jaundice by visual inspection in the majority of babies 
is unacceptable in view of the evidence which shows that this is inaccurate. The GDG is  of the 
opinion that bilirubin measurement within 6 hours is required for all jaundiced babies. Options 
include serum bilirubin testing in all term babies who are jaundiced, or transcutaneous bilirubin 
in those of gestational age ≥ 35 weeks followed by serum bilirubin in appropriate subgroups. 

Neonatal jaundice 
86 
Depending on the number of bilirubinometers needed, the latter strategy is a more cost- effective 
option than serum bilirubin in all visibly jaundiced babies . In addition, transcutaneous bilir ubin 
measurement is a less invasive procedure than blood sampling and thus is more acceptable to 
parents and clinical staff. 
 
Recommendation – 5.2 Devices for measuring bilirubin 
When measuring the bilirubin level: 
• use a transcutaneous bilirubinometer in babies with a gestational age of 35 weeks or more 
and postnatal age of more than 24 hours 
• if a transcutaneous bilirubinometer is not available, measure the serum bilirubin  
• if a transcutaneous bilirubinometer measurement indicates a bilirubin level greater than 
250 micromol/litre check the result by measuring the serum bilirubin 
• always use serum bilirubin measurement to determine the bilirubin level in babies with 
jaundice in the first 24 hours of life 
• always use serum bilirubin measurement to determine the bilirubin level in babies less 
than 35 weeks gestational age 
• always use serum bilirubin measurement for babies at or above the relevant treatment 
threshold for their postnatal age, and for all subsequent measurements 
• do not use an icterometer. 
 

 
87 
6 Formal assessment for the 
causes of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Introduction 
Most babies with an elevated serum bilirubin level do not have underlying disease, and the 
jaundice resolves by 2 weeks of age. However, an important minority have a diagnosis that 
requires specific treatment. Babies who have haemolysis (rapid breakdown of red cells) because 
of antibodies or G6PD deficiency can have rapidly rising bilirubin levels that are difficult to 
control even with phototherapy. The correct diagnosis of ABO blood group incompatibility has 
implications for future pregnancies, and G6PD deficiency can affect other family members. In 
babies with prolonged jaundice, a late diagnosis of biliary atresia significantly reduces the 
chance of successful surgery and increases the chance of a liver transplant being required. For 
all these reasons, further investigation has to be considered in some cases. 
Current practice regarding the level of investigation that is carried out in babies who are 
jaundiced varies enormously, particularly with regard to concern about bacterial sepsis and the 
use of antibiotics. The GDG considered that it was important to examine the evidence in order 
to determine the appropriate investigations that should be performed, and in which groups  
(mild, moderate and severe hyperbilirubinaemia, and early and prolonged jaundice).  
Clinical question 
Q4. What should be included in a formal assessment of a baby with neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? 
i) What are the elements of a formal assessment in a baby with neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? 
 a) Clinical examination 
 b) Total and split bilirubin 
 c) Blood tests – blood grouping, G6PD levels, haematocrit, 
 d) Urine tests 
 e) Biochemical tests (bilirubin/albumin ratio, other relevant tests) 
ii) What is the clinical and cost-effectiveness of the tests carried out during formal 
assessment? 
 
In order to identify possible causes of neonatal jaundice according to the severity of 
hyperbilirubinaemia, it was decided to include only those studies that met the following 
predefined selection criteria: 
● studies with well-defined serum bilirubin levels as cut-off for entry into the study 
● s tudies with no exclusion criteria 
● s tudies examining incidence rates of both blood group incompatibility and G6PD deficiency 
levels 
● i ncidence rates of infections and idiopathic jaundice were also analysed if reported.  
Finally, we examined the use of the additional tests such as tests for conjugated and 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia, medical co-morbidity, prolonged jaundice and the 
bilirubin/albumin (B/A) ratio. The calculation of the B/A ratio has long been suggested as a 
‘proxy’ for free bilirubin, because if albumin levels are low then there is more unbound 

Neonatal jaundice 
88 
unconjugated free bilirubin in the circulation, and it is free bilirubin that crosses the blood–
brain barrier. Although there is a substantial literature on the B/A ratio, it is not often used in 
clinical practice. The GDG is aware of an ongoing RCT in the Netherlands that is specifically 
directed at evaluating the use of the B/A ratio as an adjunct to serum bilirubin levels in the 
management of jaundice, but the work is continuing and no results are as yet available. 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
Identified studies were subdivided into three groups as follows: 
● a group with an entry level of serum bilirubin > 154 micromol/litre but no mean serum 
bilirubin for the entire sample (used here as a proxy for ‘mild’ hyperbilirubinaemia) 
● a group including studies where either the serum bilirubin threshold for inclusion or the 
mean serum bilirubin of the entire sample was between 255 and 399 micromol/litre (used 
here as a proxy for ‘moderate’ hyperbilirubinaemia) 
● a group including studies where the serum bilirubin threshold for inclusion was 
> 400 micromol/litre, the mean serum bilirubin of the entire sample was 
> 400 micromol/litre or studies where exchange transfusions were required (used here as a 
proxy for ‘severe’ hyperbilirubinaemia). 
Kernicterus 
Identified studies included babies who met recognised criteria for  kernicterus including the 
following clinical features: 
● poor feeding 
● lethargy 
● high-pitched cry 
● increased tone 
● opisthotonos 
● seizures 
● sensorineural hearing loss, 
● motor delay, extrapyramidal disturbance 
● gaze palsy 
● d ental dysplasia. 
6.1 Tests to detect underlying disease in all babies with 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Description of included studies (6.1.1–6.1.4) 
Overall, 33 articles contributed to this analysis and some have been included in more than one 
group.* The median sample size was 109 (range 21– 3099). For population- based studies, the 
incidence of jaundice by live births was recorded. 
Serum bilirubin > 154 micromol/litre 
Nine studies 82-90 with 10 204 participants contributed data to this analysis (Table  6.1). Three 
studies each were carried out in Nigeria 82;83;85 and India 84;86;87 and one apiece in Australia ,89 
Pakistan88 and China .90 The entry levels ranged from bilirubin levels > 154 micromol/litre to 
> 205 micromol/litre. Mean serum bilirubin levels were not reported in any study. Jaundice at 
this level affected 10.4% of all live births in the  three population-based studies included in this 
analysis.82;88;89 Where reported, the age of onset of jaundice ranged from 0 to 10 days. Preterm 
babies were included in all but three studies82;83;86 and accounted for between 3.6% and 36.3% 
of the study sample. Breastfeeding rates and the mean gestational age were not reported in any 
study. Only one study85 reported mean birthweight, which was 2.73 ± 0.74 kg. Males accounted 
for 57.9% of cases in the three studies83;86;90 that reported gender. 
                                                 
* If a stu dy was included in more than one category, sample demographics are only provided for the first category.  

Formal assessment for the causes of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia 
89 
Table 6.1 Results of studies investigating the causes of jaundice at various levels of serum bilirubin 
Country Criteria Preterm (%) Age (days) BF (%) Associated pathology 
Blood group incompatibility  G6PD deficiency  Infection Idiopathic/no known cause 
n N (%) n N (%) n N (%) n N (%) 
Serum bilirubin less than 255 micromol/litre 
Nigeria82 > 170  0–10  180 424 42.5 229 424 54 60 424 14.1 39 424 9.2 
Nigeria83 > 170  0–10  11 40 27.5 13 40 32.5 34 40 85 3 40 7.5 
Nigeria85 > 205 25.6   43 150 28.7 109 327 33.3 38 217 17.5    
India86 > 170    30 100 30 4 100 4       
India87 > 205 14   9 50 18 2 50 4 7 50 14    
India84 > 205 16.7   102 454 24.5 23 454 5.1       
Pakistan88 PT 13   113 869 13 20 869 2.3 165 869 19    
Australia89 > 154 36.3   794 6129 12.9 51 6129 0.8 198 6129 3.2    
China90 > 170 3.6 0– 10  414 1811 22.9 241 1811 13.4 680 1811 37.5    
Serum bilirubin between 255 micromol/litre and 399 micromol/litre 
India91 > 255 18.5 0– 15 63 24 92 26.1 4 92 4.3 18 92 19.6    
Nigeria92 > 170    24 102 23.5 41 102 40.2 57 102 55.9    
Israel93 > 306 0 0– 10 95.2 0 21 0 2 21 9.5 0 21 0    
Nigeria94 > 255 16 0–7  28 125 22.4 49 125 39.2 1 1 25 0.8 35 125 28 
Papua New Guinea95 > 2 55 10  100 12 50 24 11 50 22 8 50 16 19 50 38 
Singapore96 > 2 55    78 270 28.9 18 270 6.7       
Singapore97 > 2 21 6.6   43 181 23.8 4 181 2.2       
Taiwan98 > 255  0–10  62 196 31.6 43 196 21.9 10 196 5.1 53 196 27 
Turkey99 359    220 624 35.3 24 624 3.8 36 624 5.7    
Iran100 ICD   100 22 376 5.8 8 376 2.1 59 376 15.7    
UAE101 Chart 26 0–6  23 85 27 8 85 9 .4       
Saudi Arabia102 > 2 55    23 211 10.9 64 211 30.3 4 411 1 .9    
S
erum bilirubin> 400 micromol/litre or exchange transfusion 
China90 ET 3.6 0– 10  157 581 27 130 581 22.4       
Singapore96 ET    18 46 39.1 2 46 4.3 8 46 17.4 6 46 13 
India84 ET    39 66 59.1 11 66 16.7       

Neonatal jaundice 
90 
Country Criteria Preterm (%) Age (days) BF (%) Associated pathology 
Blood group incompatibility  G6PD deficiency  Infection Idiopathic/no known cause 
n N (%) n N (%) n N (%) n N (%) 
India103 ET    21 141 14.9 24 141 17.2 34 141 24.1 50 141 35.4 
Pakistan88 ET    11 27 40.1 2 27 7.4 6 27 22.2    
Papua New Guinea95 ET 10  100 4 11 36.4 3 11 27.3 2 11 18.2 2 11 18.2 
Australia89 ET    166 248 66.9 2 248 0.8 2 248 0.8    
Ghana104 > 340 0 0–8  15 35 42.9 13 35 37.1    10 35 28.6 
Nigeria94 ET 16 0–7  16 53 30.2 21 53 39.6 0 53 0 11 53 20.7 
Nigeria105 > 204    15 109 13.8 67 109 61.5 24 109 22 13 109 11.9 
UK106 > 510  0–31 87.7 39 106 36.8 5 106 4.7 4 106 3.8 29 106 27.3 
Turkey107 > 425 0   8 21 38.1 4 21 19.5    10 21 47.5 
Turkey108 > 428  0–30 100 14 93 15.1 2 39 5.1 7 93 7.5 61 93 65.6 
Greece109 ET    35 75 46.7 14 75 18.7       
Iran100 ET   100 2 14 14.3 0 14 0 9 14 64.3    
Denmark110 > 4 50 8.8 0– 28 100 54 113 47.8 1 113 0.9       
C
anada111 > 425  0–60 81.4 60 258 23.2 20 258 7.75 3 258 1.2    
Kernicterus 
China90 K       51 156 32.7 58 156 37.2             
UK106 K       4 14 28.6 3 14 21.4 2 14 14.3 1 14 7.1 
Nigeria112 BE       35 115 30.4 40 115 34.8 16 115 13.9       
Ghana104 K       6 17 35.3 8 17 47       3 17 17.6 
USA113 K       1 14 7.1 3 14 21.4 2 14 14.3 6 14 42.8 
USA20 K       24 125 19.2 26 125 20.8       44 125 35.2 
Singapore97 K       4 8 50 0 8 0             
Greece109 K       1 6 16.7 3 6 50             
Turkey108 K       1 6 16.7 1 6 16.7 3 6 50 1 6 16.7 
Turkey99 K       3 6 50 1 6 16.7             
BE = bilirubin encephalopathy; BF = breastfeeding; ET = exchange transfusion; ICD = International Classification of Diseases; K = kernicterus; PT = phototherapy. 
 

 
91 
Serum bilirubin between 255 and 399 micromol/litre 
Twelve studies 91-102 with 2333 participants contributed data to this analysis (Table  6.1). Two 
studies each were carried out in Nigeria92;94 and Singapore96;97 and one apiece in India,91 Israel,93 
Papua New Guinea ,95 Iran,100 Saudi Arabia ,102 Taiwan,98 Turkey99 and the United Arab 
Emirates.101 Bilirubin levels at entry ranged from > 170 micromol/litre to > 306 micromol/litre. 
Jaundice at this level affected 2.2% of all live births in the five population- based studies 92-96 
included in this analysis. The percentage of preterm babies (reported in six  studies91;93-95;97;101) 
ranged between 0% and 18.6% and the mean serum bilirubin levels (also reported in six  
studies91-93;97-99) ranged between 310 micromol/litre and 376 micromol/litre. Where reported, the 
age of onset ranged from 0 to 15 days, and breastfeeding rates ranged from 63% to 100%. In 
one study ,93 the mean gestational age was 39.3 ± 1.2 weeks and not reported in the other 
11 studies. The mean birthweight was 3082 ± 530 g and 3206 ± 340 g in two studies 93;99 and 
was not reported in the other ten studies. Males accounted for 52.2% of cases of moderate 
jaundice in the six studies91-93;95;99;100 that reported on gender. 
Serum bilirubin > 400 micromol/litre or requiring exchange transfusion 
Seventeen studies 84;88-90;94-96;100;103-111 with 1997 participants contributed data to this analysis 
(Table 6.1). There were three good -quality national surveillance studies from Canada ,111 
Denmark106;110 and the UK, while , of the rest, two studies each were carried out in India ,84;103 
Nigeria94;105 and Turkey107;108 and one apiece in Australia,89 China,90 Ghana,104 Greece,109 Iran,100 
Pakistan,88 Papua New Guinea 95 and Singapore .96 Bilirubin levels at entry ranged from 
> 425 micromol/litre to > 510 micromol/litre. Su bjects in studies with lower entry levels of 
serum bilirubin but who received exchange transfusions were also included in this analysis. Six  
studies104-108;111 reported mean serum bilirubin levels ranging from 471 micromol/litre to 
595 micromol/litre. Hyperbilirubinaemia at these levels affected 0.02% of all live births in the 
three population- based studies 88;89;95 included in this analysis. Seven studies 90;94;95;104;107;110 
reported the proportion of preterm babies and these babies accounted for between 0% and 
19.9% in the studies. Where reported, the age of onset of jaundice ranged from 0 to 60 days, 
breastfeeding rates ranged from 81.4% to 100%, mean gestational age ranged from 38.2 weeks 
to 38.6 weeks and mean birthweight ranged from 2943 g to 3560 g. Mean birthweight was not 
reported in five studies.103-105;108;109 Males accounted for 63.1% of cases of severe jaundice in the 
eight studies104-111 that reported on gender. 
Kernicterus 
Ten studies 20;90;97;99;104;106;108;109;112;113 w ith 467 participants contributed data to this analysis 
(Ta ble  6.1). Two studies each were carried out in Turkey 99;108 and the USA20;113 and one apiece 
in China ,90 Ghana,104 Greece,109 Nigeria,112 Singapore97 abd the UK .106 One population- based 
study106 reported that kernicterus affected 0.001% of all live births in a UK -based sample. No 
demographic details are available as the data on kernicterus are a subset of the complete 
sample, not all of whom had kernicterus.* 
Description of included studies (6.1.5–6.1.7) 
Overall, six articles contributed to these analyses. One literature review 114 and two case series 
from India115 and Canada116 were included in the review on the Bilir ubin/Albumin ratio.  The 
literature review 114which included six studies was rated EL  1++, while the other two studies 
115;116 were rated EL 3. One case series117 of EL 3 from Brazil was included in the review of free 
bilirubin. Two case series 118;119 OF EL 3 from the USA were included in the review of 
conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. 
6.1.1 Blood group incompatibility 
Review findings 
The pooled prevalence rates of blood incompatibility increased as serum bilirubin levels rose. 
This was identified as a cause of hyperbilirubinaemia in 16.9% of cases at serum bilirubin 
< 254 micromol/litre, 23.9% at serum bilirubin between 255 micromol/litre and 
                                                 
* If a study was included in more than one category, sample demographics are only provided for the first category. 

Neonatal jaundice 
92 
399 micromol/litre and 33.7%  serum bilirubin > 400 micromol/litre. Blood group 
incompatibility was also implicated in 27.8% of cases of kernicterus. 
A sensitivity analysis of these prevalence rates ( Figure 6.1) shows the varying importance of 
blood group incompatibility in different regions of the world. In Africa and Asia, it accounted for 
over 20% of cases at each level of serum bilirubin and in cases of kernicterus. In studies fro m 
the Middle East, it was found in 21.9% of cases of serum bilirubin between 255 and 
399 micromol/litre, in 29.1% of cases of exchange transfusion or serum bilirubin 
> 400 micromol/litre and in 27.8% of cases of kernicterus. In Europe/North America , blood 
group incompatibility  was implicated in 32.1% of cases of serum bilirubin 
> 400 micromol/litre or exchange transfusions and 18.9% of kernicterus cases. 
6.1.2 G6PD deficiency 
Review findings 
The pooled prevalence rates of G6PD deficiency increased as serum bilirubin levels rose. This 
was identified as a cause of hyperbilirubinaemia in 6.8% of cases of serum bilirubin 
< 254 micromol/litre, 11.8% at serum bilirubin between 255 micromol/litre and 
399 micromol/litre and 16.5% serum bilirubin > 400 micromol/litre. G6PD deficiency was also 
implicated in 30.6% of cases of kernicterus. 
A sensitivity analysis of these  prevalence rates (Figure 6.2) shows the varying importance of 
G6PD deficiency in different world regions. In Africa it accounted for over 35% of cases at each 
level of serum bilirubin and in cases of kernicterus. In Asia the prevalence rates rose from 8.8% 
at serum bilirubin <  254 micromol/litre and 9.3% at serum bilirubin between 255 and 
399 micromol/litre to 19.6% of cases of exchange transfusion or serum bilirubin 
> 400 micromol/litre and reached a peak at 35.4% of kernicterus cases. 
Likewise, in the Middle East the prevalence of G6PD deficiency rose from 8.0% in cases with 
serum bilirubin between 255 and 399 micromol/litre to 27.8% in cases of kernicterus. In Europe 
and North America it was implicated in 5.5% of babies with serum bilirubin 
> 400 micromol/litre or receiving exchange transfusions, and 20.9% of kernicterus cases.  
6.1.3 Infection 
Review findings 
The pooled prevalence rates of infection (as defined in each study; see the evidence tables) 
varied as serum bilirubin levels rose. This was identified as a cause of hyperbilirubinaemia in 
12.4% of cases at serum bilirubin <  254 micromol/litre, 9.7% at serum bilirubin between 
255 micromol/litre and 399  micromol/litre and 8.9% at serum bilirubin >  400 micromol/litre. 
Infection was also implicated in 15.4% of cases of kernicterus. 
A sensitivity analysis of these prevalence rates (Figure  6.3) shows the varying importance of 
infection in different world regions. In Africa infection was associated with over 13.9% of all 
cases of hyperbilirubinaemia or kernicterus. 
In Asia the prevalence rates ranged from 9.7% to 31.2% of all cases of hyperbilirubinaemia. In 
the Middle East infection was found in 6.9% of cases of serum bilirubin between 255 and 
399 micromol/litre and 50.0% of cases of kernicterus. In Europe and North America infection 
was implicated in 1.9% of babies with serum bilirubin >  400 micromol/litre or receiving 
exchange transfusions and in 14.3% of kernicterus cases. 
6.1.4 No known cause 
Review findings 
Unsurprisingly, no cause for jaundice was found in a significant number of babies at all levels of 
serum bilirubin. No cause was identified in 9.0% of babies who had serum bilirubin 
< 254 micromol/litre, 28.8% at serum bilirubin between 255 micromol/litre and 
399 micromol/litre and 31.2% at serum bilirubin >  400 micromol/litre. No cause could be 
found for the hyperbilirubinaemia in 31.2% of cases of kernicterus. 

Formal assessment for the causes of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia 
93 
Figure 6.1 Prevalence of blood group incompatibility related to severity of 
hyperbilirubinaemia in different geographical regions expressed as a percentage of cases ; 
TSB = total serum bilirubin, ET = exchange transfusion 
Figure 6.2 Prevalence of G6PD deficiency related to severity of hyperbilirubinaemia in different 
geographical regions expressed as a percentage of cases; TSB = total serum bilirubin, ET = exchange 
transfusion 


Neonatal jaundice 
94 
Figure 6.3 Prevalence of infection related to severity of hyperbilirubinaemia in different  
geographical regions expressed as a percentage of cases; TSB = total serum bilirubin, ET = exchange 
transfusion 
Figure 6.4 Prevalence of ‘no cause identified’ in relation to severity of hyperbilirubinaemia in 
different geographical regions expressed as a percentage of cases; TSB  = total serum bilirubin, 
ET = exchange transfusion 
 


Formal assessment for the causes of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia 
95 
A sensitivity analysis of these prevalence rates ( Figure 6.4) shows the varying importance of 
idiopathic hyperbilirubinaemia in different world regions. In Africa no known cause was found 
in over 9.0% of cases at each level of serum bilirubin and in cases of kernicterus. In Asia no 
cause could be found for 27% of cases with serum bilirubin between 255 micromol/litre and 
399 micromol/litre and 29.9% of cases of exchange transfusion or serum bilirubin 
> 400 micromol/litre. In the Middle East no cause was found for 62.3% of cases of serum 
bilirubin > 400 micromol/litre and 16.7% of cases of kernicterus. In Europe and North America 
27.3% of babies with serum bilirubin > 400 micromol/litre and 33.3% of cases of kernicterus 
had no cause identified. 
Overall evidence summary (6.1.1– 6.1.4) 
These meta-analyses indicate  that blood group incompatibility and G6PD deficiency are the 
most commonly associated conditions in babies with hyperbilirubinaemia 
> 255 micromol/litre. Infection was less commonly found at this serum bilirubin level but was 
more often found in cases of kernicterus, and in many cases no cause was ever found. 
Further examination of the data demonstrates that among jaundiced babies in Europe and North 
America blood group incompatibility was the most prevalent underlying factor leading to higher 
bilirubin levels (> 400 micromol/litre), whereas G6PD deficiency was more common in 
kernicterus cases. 
G6PD deficiency is the most common associated condition in cases of jaundice of any severity 
among African babies while blood group incompatibility was the second most common factor 
in this group. Amongst jaundiced babies in Asia , both blood group incompatibility and G6PD  
deficiency were the two most common causes and they were identified more frequently in 
babies with more severe hyperbilirubinaemia. Data from studies in the Middle  East were too 
sparse to allow any meaningful sensitivity analysis. 
Overall GDG translation from evidence (6.1.1–6.1.4) 
Only poor -quality evidence (EL  2− and EL  3) was available to inform our recommendations 
regarding the formal assessment of babies with hyperbilirubinaemia. The evidence supports 
current clinical practice, which includes investigations targeted at detecting haemolysis due to 
blood group incompatibility and G6PD deficiency in appropriate ethnic groups. 
The evidence shows that blood group incompatibility remains an important cause of 
hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus in Europe and worldwide. Although the evidence did not 
support the routine use of DAT (Coombs’ test) in healthy babies, this finding emphasises the 
conclusions reached in Chapter 4 on prediction (see Section 4.2.3), namely that a positive DAT 
(Coombs’ test) in a baby born to a mother who did not receive prophylactic anti- D 
immunoglobulin during pregnancy should be taken into account when considering the cause of 
jaundice. Any information about the presence of maternal blood group antibodies should be 
transferred from the mother’s notes to those of the baby. 
Sepsis was an important co-morbidity in some reported series. No co-morbidity was identified in 
a significant minority of the babies in the included studies. 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 6.1. 
6.1.5 Bilirubin/albumin ratio 
Review findings 
The usefulness of the B/A ratio in predicting bilirubin- induced neurotoxicity in preterm babies 
(gestational age < 32 weeks) with unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia was examined in a 
systematic review.114 Studies were included if the B/A ratio was measured and outcome data on 
neurotoxicity or neurodevelopmental outcome were  reported. Six studies were included. One 
study reported a trend suggesting that the B/A ratio was better than serum bilirubin in predicting 
abnormal auditory brainstem response (ABR) maturation (P  = 0.19 versus P = 0.98) while a 
second reported that higher B/A ratios were present in babies with abnormal ABR who 

Neonatal jaundice 
96 
subsequently developed hearing loss. One of the included studies reported on IQ at 6 years and 
found that IQ decreased at higher B/A ratios (r  = −0.12; P = 0.06). A study of autopsies in 398 
babies identified 27 (6.8%) with kernicterus. These 27 babies were compared with 103 
autopsied babies matched for birthweight and gestational age. There was no difference in mean 
serum bilirubin between the kernicteric and non- kernicteric babies. Serum albumin and the 
reserve albumin binding capacity were lower in the kernicteric babies but where B/A ratios 
could be calculated there was no difference. The final included study found that the bilirubin-
binding capacity expressed as the molar B/A ratio was lower in kernicteric than non- kernicteric 
babies (P < 0.05). [EL 1++] 
A case series in India 115 reported the correlation between the B/A ratio and free bilirubin. The 
study included 53 babies with hyperbilirubinaemia with a mean gestationa l age of 
37.9 ± 2.3 weeks and mean birthweight of 2780 ± 620 g. The reported mean serum bilirubin 
was 227 ± 80 micromol/litre, mean free bilirubin 8.7 ± 5.6 nmol/l and mean albumin levels 
3.6 ± 0.7 g/dl. The mean B/A ratio was 3.7 and the correlation between free bilirubin and B/A 
ratio was 0.74 (P < 0.001). [EL 3] 
A Canadian case series 116 examined the relationship between albumin levels and free bilirubin. 
A total of 55 plasma samples from 46 jaundiced babies were used. Diagnoses included preterm 
birth, birth asphyxia, respiratory distress syndrome and idiopathic hyperbilirubinaemia. The 
mean gestational age was 36  ± 4 weeks and the mean birthweight was 2453 ± 813 g. No other 
demographic details were reported. There was a correlation between free bilirubin and the 
bilirubin/albumin molar ratio (r = 0.75; P < 0.001) [EL 3] 
6.1.6 Relationship between circulating free bilirubin and unconjugated bilirubin 
Review findings 
A case series from Brazil 117 examined the correlation between free bilirubin and unconjuga ted 
bilirubin in 43 term babies with non- haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia. Inclusion criteria were 
birthweight > 2 500 g, negative DAT, gestational age 37–41 weeks, postnatal age < 7 days, 
and negative maternal history and serology for syphilis . The babies had no history of perinatal 
hypoxia, had Apgar score > 8 at 1 and 5 minutes, did not receive any substances competing for 
albumin binding sites and had not received phototherapy, exchange transfusions or human 
albumin. Over half of the sample ( 25; 58.1%) were male but no other demographic data were 
reported. The correlation between free bilirubin and indirect bilirubin was 0.69 (P  < 0.01). 
[EL 3] 
6.1.7 Medical co-morbidity identified by measuring conjugated bilirubin, routine 
haematology or urinalysis 
Review findings 
A retrospective case series in the USA 118 looked at the usefulness of measuring conjugated 
bilirubin in jaundiced term babies. Preterm babies were excluded. Testing rates were different in 
the two units: in one, serum bilirubin and conjugated bilirubin were measured in 55% and 53% 
of the term babies and in the second unit in 16% and 5% , respectively. Abnormal results were 
defined as the top 5% of conjugated bilirubin measurements in each unit so in the first unit an 
abnormal score was > 39 micromol/litre while in the second it was > 17 micromol/litre. Of 
149 babies with high conjugated bilirubin levels , 40 (26.8%) had associated conditions but 
identifying conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia contributed to the diagnosis in only four of these. 
Over half, 78 (52.3%), of the cases with high conjugated bilirubin were unexplained while 24 
(16.1%) were laboratory errors. Associated diagnoses included isoimmunisation in 19 (12.7%) 
babies, sepsis or pneumonia in five  (3.6%), congestive heart failure in five  (3.6%), multiple 
anomalies in two (1.3%), pyloric stenosis in two (1.3%), extreme growth restriction (possible 
rubella) in one (0.7%), hypothyroidism in one (0.7%) and choledochal cyst in one (0.7%). [EL 3] 
A retrospective case series in the USA 119 looked at the usefulness of laboratory tests in babies 
with hyperbilirubinaemia. Only babies (n = 447) with a birthweight of > 2500 g were included. 
The mean birthweight was 3440 ± 485 g. No other demographic details were reported. Routine 
tests included total and conjugated bilirubin, blood type, complete blood count, differential cell 

Formal assessment for the causes of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia 
97 
count, reticulocyte count, platelet count, red blood cell morphologic al examination, and a 
urinalysis. No cause was identified in 214 (47.8%) cases of hyperbilirubinaemia. A possible 
cause of hyperbilirubinaemia was identified only from patient history, physical examination or 
routine haematocrit (at 4 hours) in 145 (32.4%) cases. Thirteen  cases (2.9%) had other causes 
related to hyperbilirubinaemia that were not i dentified by the routine tests. Seventy -five cases 
(16.8%) were diagnosed from the routine tests. These included isoimmunisation alone in 58 
cases (12.9%) and isoimmunisation accompanied by preterm birth, bruising, cephalohaematoma, 
bacterial infection, viral infection or maternal diabetes in 17 cases (3.8%). [EL 3] 
Overall evidence summary (6.1.5–6.1.7) 
A number of poor-quality studies and one good-quality review were identified. The good-quality 
review identified six studies that showed a link between the B/A ratio and various indices of 
bilirubin encephalopathy (abnormal ABR, IQ at 6 years). Two poor -quality studies showed a 
moderately positive correlation between free bilirubin and both the B/A ratio and the B/A molar 
ratio (r = 0.74 and r  = 0.75, respectively). There was also a moderately positive correlation 
between unconjugated bilirubin and free bilirubin (r = 0.69). 
Similarly, two studies have been carried out to determine the diagnostic yield from additional  
tests, including direct bilirubin, to help in the investigation of early jaundice or prolonged 
jaundice. The value of these additional tests was variable, and they were often non- contributory. 
Overall GDG translation from evidence (6.1.5–6.1.7) 
The evidence does not support changing current clinical practice in the UK, which does not 
routinely include the calculation of the B/A ratio in determining treatment thresholds for 
jaundice. Furthermore , e xpert advice received by the GDG is that most commonly used 
laboratory methods overestimate albumin, especially at low concentrations. External quality 
assurance data from October 2009 (www.birminghamquality.org.uk ) shows that the affected 
methods are used by virtually all NHS laboratories. The GDG is aware of an ongoing RCT in the 
Netherlands which is examining the use of the B/A ratio alongside serum bilirubin in jaundiced 
babies as an indicator for treatment with phototherapy. 
Poor-quality evidence did not show a clinically useful correlation between unconjugated 
bilirubin and free bilirubin. Previous advice advocated subtracting direct bilirubin from the total 
serum bilirubin when deciding on management in babies with hyperbilirubinaemia. The GDG 
agrees with the AAP that this practice should cease, and total bilirubin levels should be used to 
guide management. The GDG is  aware of rare cases of kernicterus with high conjugated 
bilirubin levels, and there is a theoretical risk that conjugated bilirubin can elevate free bilirubin 
levels by displacing unconjugated bilirubin from the binding sites. Specialist advice should be 
sought for the exceptional cases in which the conjugated bilirubin is more than 50% of the total. 
The GDG consider s that total serum bilirubin should be used to guide the management of 
jaundiced babies less than 14 days old. 
 
Recommendations – 6.1 Tests to detect underlying disease in all babies with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
In addition to a full clinical examination by a suitably trained healthcare professional, carry 
out all of the following tests in babies with significant hyperbilirubinaemia as part of an 
assessment for underlying disease (see threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold 
graphs (Section 1.6)): 
• serum bilirubin (for baseline level to assess response to treatment) 
• blood packed cell volume 
• blood group (mother and baby) 
• DAT (Coombs’ test). Interpret the result taking account of the strength of reaction, and 
whether mother received prophylactic anti-D immunoglobulin during pregnancy.  
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
98 
When assessing the baby for underlying disease consider whether the following tests are 
clinically indicated: 
• full blood count and examination of blood film 
• blood glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase levels, taking account of ethnic origin  
• microbiological cultures of blood, urine and/or cerebrospinal fluid (if infection is 
suspected). 
Do not use the albumin/bilirubin ratio when making decisions about the management of 
hyperbilirubinaemia  
Do not subtract conjugated bilirubin from total serum bilirubin when making decisions about 
the management of hyperbilirubinaemia (see management thresholds in the threshold table  
(Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)). 
6.2 Formal assessment of babies with prolonged jaundice 
Description of included studies 
Three studies  of EL  3 from Turkey 120;121 and the UK 122 have been included. Two were case 
series120;122 and one was a retrospective chart review.121 The sample size ranged from 42 to 381. 
Review findings 
A UK case series 122 e xamined causes of prolonged jaundice, defined as jaundice persisting 
beyond day 14. The mean gestational age of the 154 included babies was 39 weeks, the mean 
birthweight was 3200 g and the mean age at referral was 16 days. Ninety-six (62.3%) were male 
and 89 (57.8%) were white, 36 (23.4%) were black and 20 (13.0%) were Asian. The vast 
majority (142; 92.2%) were breastfed and the remainder either bottle -fed or had mixed feeds. 
Overall, initial assessment resulted in nine (5.8%) babies being referred on for further 
investigation. Clinical examination identified one case of hepatoblastoma, and ultimately led to 
the detection of trisomy  9p. Abnormal results for liver function tests identified one baby with 
giant cell hepatitis. Three cases of G6PD deficiency and two cases of urinary tract infection 
were identified. [EL 3] 
A case series from Turkey 120 examined causes of prolo nged jaundice in term and near -term 
babies. Of 381 babies with hyperbilirubinaemia, 31 (8.1%) had prolonged jaundice and 26 
were included in the study. The mean gestational age was 38 weeks, the mean birthweight was 
3194 g, the mean age at presentation was  19 days and 15 (57.7%) of the group were male. The 
mean serum bilirubin at presentation was 246 micromol/litre. One baby had conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia and was referred for exclusion of biliary atresia. Seven babies (26.9%) had 
blood group incompatibility and four  (15.4%) had inadequate caloric intake. The remaining 14 
(53.8%) had ‘breastmilk’ jaundice. [EL 3] 
Causes of conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia were also reported in another Turkish study ,121 a 
retrospective review of 42 affected babies. The mean gestational age was 37 weeks and no other 
demographic details were reported. The mean age at presentation was 20 days. The mean total 
serum bilirubin was 292 micromol/litre and the mean conjugated bilirubin was 130 micromol/litre. 
The causes of the conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia included culture -proven sepsis in 15 (35.7%) 
babies, perinatal hypoxia–ischaemia in seven (16.7%), blood group incompatibility in five (11.9%), 
trisomy 21 in three (7.1%), TPN-associated cholestasis in three (7.1%), neonatal hepatitis in two 
(4.8%), metabolic liver disease in one  (2.4%), biliary atresia in one  (2.4%) and portal venous 
thrombosis in one (2.4%). No cause was identified in four (9.5%) cases. [EL 3] 
Evidence summary 
First-line investigations for prolonged jaundice resulted in nine  (5.8%) babies being referred on 
for further investigation in a UK -based study. A Turkish study resulted in one baby (3.8%) being 
referred for tertiary investigation while 14 (53.8%) were considered to have ‘breastmilk’ 
jaundice. In a second Turkish study, associated pathology was identified in 38 of 42 (90%) 
babies with conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. 

Formal assessment for the causes of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia 
99 
GDG translation from evidence 
In term babies, jaundice at or beyond day 14 is defined as ‘prolonged jaundice’. In these babies, 
a full clinical examination is crucial and key investigations include measurement of total and 
conjugated bilirubin, urine culture and testing for G6PD deficiency (if appropriate). 
The GDG is aware that many neonatal units use jaundice persisting at or beyond day  21 as the 
definition of prolonged jaundice in preterm babies. There was no evidence available for review 
on this aspect of prolonged jaundice, and hence the GDG saw no reason to change clinical 
practice in this respect. 
The importance of hypothyroidism as a cause of neonatal jaundice should be appreciated and 
clinicians should check that babies with prolonged jaundice have undergone routine newborn 
bloodspot screening. Infection and liver disease  (e.g. biliary atresia and neonatal hepatitis ) are 
important underlying causes of prolonged jaundice and should be considered if conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia is identified. Pale stools and dark urine staining the nappy are a well -
recognised and important clue to possible liver  disease. The GDG is aware of the evidence 
demonstrating better outcomes for babies with biliary atresia who are offered early surgery and 
hence stresses  the urgency of seeking specialist advice when a high level (greater than 
25 micromol/litre) of conjugated bilirubin is found. 
The GDG considered that, in the first instance, a consultant neonatologist or a  consultant 
paediatrician should be consulted and cases subsequently referred to a specialist liver disease 
centre if clinically indicated after appropriate investigation. 
 
Recommendations – 6.2 Formal assessment of babies with prolonged jaundice 
In babies with a gestational age of 37 weeks or more with jaundice lasting more than 14 days, 
and in babies with a gestational age of less than 37 weeks with jaundice lasting more than 
21 days:  
• look for pale chalky stools and/or dark urine that stains the nappy  
• measure the conjugated bilirubin 
• carry out a full blood count 
• carry out a blood group determination (mother and baby) and DAT (Coombs’ test). 
Interpret the result taking account of the strength of reaction, and whether mother received 
prophylactic anti-D immunoglobulin during pregnancy. 
• carry out a urine culture 
• ensure that routine metabolic screening (including screening for congenital 
hypothyroidism) has been performed. 
Follow expert advice about care for babies with a conjugated bilirubin level greater than 
25 micromol/litre because this may indicate serious liver disease. 
 

 
100 
7 Treatment 
Clinical questions 
Phototherapy: 
i) How effective is phototherapy? 
ii) What is the best modality of giving phototherapy (clinical and cost-effectiveness)? 
 a) Conventional phototherapy (single, double or multiple phototherapy) 
 b) Sunlight 
 c) Fibreoptic phototherapy (biliblankets, bilibeds and other products) 
iii) What are the criteria/indications for starting and stopping phototherapy in babies with 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
iv) What is the correct procedure when administering phototherapy (with specific reference 
to method of feeding/types of feed, incubator or bassinet care, the effect of intermittent 
versus constant phototherapy on maternal–infant bonding, and parental anxiety)? 
How to monitor a baby with jaundice? 
i) What are the appropriate criteria for monitoring (timing, frequency) of babies with 
jaundice who are at lower risk of developing neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia/kernicterus?  
ii) What are the appropriate criteria for monitoring (timing, frequency) of babies diagnosed 
with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia who do not require immediate treatment?  
When to discharge a baby treated for hyperbilirubinaemia? What follow-up is required? 
i) What is the appropriate criterion for discharge of babies treated for neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? 
ii) What is the appropriate timing/frequency of follow-up? 
7.1 How to manage hyperbilirubinaemia 
7.1.1 What are the indications for starting and stopping treatment in babies with 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
Description of included studies 
No studies were identified. 
Review findings 
No studies were identified. 
Evidence summary 
No evidence was identified. 
GDG translation from evidence 
The GDG recognised that was no reliable evidence to inform the choice of thresholds for 
commencing therapy – including phototherapy and exchange transfusion – in babies with 
jaundice. This was not surprising. The ultimate purpose of phototherapy is to prevent 
kernicterus, and kernicterus is a rare event. Moreover, factors other than the absolute level of 
total serum bilirubin are important additional risk factors for kernicterus – for example , 
prematurity or co- existence of illnesses such as sepsis, perinatal asphyxia and acidosis. The 
GDG recognised that for these reasons it was impossible to devise studies that would accurately 
determine ‘correct’ thresholds for treatment. Nevertheless , therapeutic thresholds are important. 
There is clear evidence that phototherapy is effective and can reduce the need for exchange 
transfusion (see Section 7.2). 

Treatment 
101 
The GDG therefore considered that there was a compelling need to provide specific guidance to 
clinicians regarding thresholds for treatment. When determining the thresholds, the GDG 
considered that the primary aim was to choose a threshold with a wide margin of safety, with 
the threshold for phototherapy well below that for exchange transfusion. The rationale for this 
was the difference in the safety profile between the two therapies. However, the choice of 
threshold should not be so low that phototherapy would be used unnecessarily. In choosing the 
threshold levels, the GDG considered that account should be taken of current common practice 
while eliminating more extreme threshold strategies. 
Phototherapy thresholds for infants of 38 weeks or more gestation 
For babies of 38 or more weeks of gestation, the GDG agreed through an informal consensus 
process that a reasonable threshold for initiation of phototherapy was 350 micromol/litre in 
infants aged 96 hours or more. The GDG believed that this was consistent with current views on 
the low risk associated with moderate hyperbilirubinaemia in term babies. The GDG discusse d 
a recent publication that provided data on current practice regarding thresholds for therapy in a 
large number of units in the UK .1 That publication did not draw conclusions rega rding ‘best 
practice’ but did inform the group about the range of policies being used. The GDG noted that 
their chosen phototherapy threshold was closely comparable with the most commonly reported 
threshold (340 micromol/litre) currently used by units in the UK.1 It was also comparable with 
the threshold proposed by the American Academy of Pediatrics .123 There was evidence that the 
publication of the AAP recommendation in 1994 had not been associated with a significant 
change in the reporting of kernicterus cases in the USA.124 
For the period from birth to 96 hours, again based on informal consensus, the GDG agreed on a 
series of bilirubin levels with 6- hourly stepwise increases at which phototherapy is  
recommended until the 96- hour threshold of 350 micromol/litre is reached. These 
recommended levels are presented in table form (see the threshold table in Section 1.3). 
Phototherapy thresholds for infants less than 38 weeks of gestation 
With regard to preterm babies, one longstanding and common approach has been to determine 
the threshold for phototherapy using the simple formula 
 bilirubin in micromol/litre = (gestational age × 10) − 100 
This formula has been proposed for use in paediatric textbooks for many years. Based on 
informal consensus, the GDG agreed that this formula should be used for babies aged 72 hours 
or older. The GDG noted that use of this simple formula produced a threshold for photothera py 
that was either within or close to the middle quartiles for thresholds reported to be in current 
use by neonatal units in the UK . They were therefore comparable with ‘ average practice ’ and 
would avoid some of the more extreme values  being employed in some units. The widespread 
use of this formula is not likely to change the number of preterm babies treated with 
phototherapy in most neonatal units.  
For all babies aged less than 72 hours, based on informal consensus, the GDG agreed that the 
threshold should be lower because of the evidence that shows that bilirubin levels are rising for 
the first few days of life.34  
It was agreed for babies less than 38 weeks of gestation the threshold for phototherapy was best 
presented using a series of graphs (see treatment threshold graphs) of total bilirubin versus age in 
hours, with a separate graph for each gestational age (from 23 weeks to 37 weeks of gestation). 
The graphs were constructed using the formula for infants of 72 hours of age and older. The 
threshold levels during the first 72 hours were determined by drawing a straight line from a 
level of 40 micromol/litre (the upper limit of normal for the umbilical cord blood bilirubin) at 
birth to the formula -based level at 72 hours. The GDG were aware that Excel spreadsheets 
originally devised by Dr Giles Kendall and Professor T J Cole at University College London 
could potentially be used  to display the threshold levels in graphic  form. The GDG are grateful 
to them for their kind permission to adapt these spreadsheets. 
Exchange transfusion thresholds for babies of 38 weeks or more gestation 
Similar considerations were applied to the choice of levels for exchange transfusion. The 
process was one of informal consensus by the GDG. 

Neonatal jaundice 
102 
For babies of 38 weeks or more gestation, a threshold of 450 micromol/litre from 42 hours of 
age onward was agreed by informal consensus. This level was chosen based on the GDG’ s 
agreement that it was widely accepted that kernicterus would be very unusual in term babies 
with serum bilirubin levels lower than this. The GDG noted that this was comparable with the 
American Academy of Paediatrics recommendation of 430 micromol/litre and with reported 
thresholds currently used in many units in the UK.1 In the first 42 hours of life, again based on 
informal consensus, the GDG agreed on a series of bilirubin levels with 6- hourly stepwise 
increases at which exchange transfusion is  recommended until the 42- hour threshold of 
450 micromol/litre is reached. These recommended levels are also presented in table form ( see 
the threshold table in Section 1.3). 
Exchange transfusion thresholds for babies less than 38 weeks of gestation 
For preterm  babies, the GDG again agreed to us e a simple formula (bilirubin in 
micromol/litre = gestational age × 10) that has been proposed for use in paediatric textbooks 
for many years. Based on informal consensus , the GDG agreed that this formula should also be 
used for babies aged 72 hours or older. 
For babies less than 72 hours old, based on informal  consensus, the GDG agreed that the 
threshold should be lower for the reasons outline d above. It was again agreed that for babies 
less that 38 weeks of gestation the threshold for phototherapy is  best presented using a series of 
graphs (see the treatment threshold graphs) of total bilirubin versus age in hours, with a separate 
graph for each gestational age (from 23 weeks to 3 7 weeks of gestation). The graphs were 
constructed using the formula for the period from 72 hours of age and older. The threshold 
levels during the first 72 hours were determined by drawing a straight line from a level of 
80 micromol/litre at birth to the formula-based level at 72 hours. 
The GDG considered that these threshold recommendations for phototherapy and exchange 
transfusion do not represent a significant departure from mainstream practice in the UK and are 
similar to those currently in use in the USA , will discourage extreme practices, and will be of 
practical value for clinicians. Furthermore, by standardising national practic e, use of the 
recommended treatment thresholds will allow meaningful studies of outcome to be performed 
nationally in the future. 
Finally, the RCTs of phototherapy (reviewed in Section 7.2), which could be considered to be 
‘best practice’, predominantly assessed serum bilirubin levels every 6– 12 hours to monitor 
treatment progress. The GDG decision to use 6- hourly intervals for repeat bilirubin testing was 
driven by the need to detect rapidly rising bilirubin (> 8 .5 micromol/litre per hour), which may 
be an indicator of haemolysis. 
The GDG considered 50 micromol/litre below the exchange transfusion threshold to be a 
reasonable level at which to step down from multiple phototherapy to single phototherapy. This 
would avoid exposing babies to multiple phototherapy, with the restrictions on parental contact 
and feeding that this entails, for longer than necessary. 
The GDG also agreed that 50 micromol/litre below the phototherapy threshold would be a 
resonable level at which to stop conventional phototherapy. This  would avoid keeping babies 
under phototherapy longer than necessary. 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 7.1. 
7.1.2 Discharge and monitoring 
As there was overlap between these questions , one search was carried out for all questions. 
Primary screening o f 418 titles and abstracts from the database searches led to the retrieval of 
17 full-text papers. 
Description of included studies 
Two studies, an RCT125 of different serum bilirubin levels as criteria for stopping phototherapy 
and an uncontrolled clinical study 126 of an a priori serum bilirubin level to indicate rebound 

Treatment 
103 
jaundice, were included. Existing national guidelines from Canada, Israel and the USA were 
also checked for recommendations on discharge and monitoring. 
Review findings 
An RCT from Israel 125 compared stopping phototherapy at two different levels, one at 
17 micromol/litre and the other at 51 micromol/litre below the threshold for phototherapy. The 
study included 52 term babies (gestational age > 36 weeks) with birthweight > 2500 g who 
were eligible for phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. The mean gestational age of 
the sample was 38.7 ± 1.6 weeks, mean birthweight was 3302 ± 453 g and mean serum 
bilirubin at entry was 252  ± 36 micromol/litre. Twenty -five (48.1%) were male. Computer -
generated block randomisation was used and the sequence was concealed until allocation was 
completed. Parents were blinded to treatment allocation. There was no statistically significant 
difference between the groups in either duration of phototherapy or the number of babies 
requiring a second course of phototherapy. [EL 1++] 
An uncontrolled clinical study from Israel 126 examined the occurrence of post- phototherapy 
rebound. A group of 226 term and near -term babies treated with phototherapy had serum 
bilirubin measured 12–36 hours (mean 24 hours) after stopping phototh erapy. Babies received 
phototherapy according to the 2004 AAP guideline. 19 The mean gestational age of the sample 
was 39  ± 2 weeks, mean birthweight was 3204 ± 445 g, and mean age at onset was 
62.2 ± 38.3 hours. The mean bilirubin at initiation of phototherapy was 260 ± 55 micromol/litre. 
In all, 134 participants (59.3%) were male. Serum bilirubin was routinely measured every 
12 hours, or more often if clinically indicated. Phototherapy was discontinued when serum 
bilirubin had fallen to 205 micromol/litre, or once serum bilirubin stabilised  and fell below the 
75th centile on the hour -specific nomogram. Rebound jaundice was defined as serum bilirubin 
> 256 micromol/litre measured between 12 and 3 6 hours after stopping phototherapy. 
Phototherapy was recommenced at the clinician’s discretion but usually not at serum bilirubin 
levels below 25 6 micromol/litre. In all, 30 (13.3%) babies had rebound jaundice, with serum 
bilirubin > 256 micromol/litre. Of these, 22 were re -treated with phototherapy up to a mean of 
42 ± 26 hours after phototherapy had been discontinued. A greater number of babies rebounded 
among those in whom phototherapy was initiated at < 72 hours of age  (26 of 154, 16.9%) 
compared with those in whom phototherapy was initiated at > 72 hours of age (4 of 74, 5.4%). 
[EL 3] 
Existing guidelines vary in their recommendations on discharge and monitoring of babies with 
hyperbilirubinaemia. The Canadian Pediatric Society recommends that serum bilirubin should 
be monitored 6–12 hours after the start of phototherapy and checked 24– 48 hours after 
discontinuation of phototherapy but do es not specify when phototherapy should be 
discontinued.127 
The AAP recommends tha t, for term and near -term babies (gestational age  > 35 weeks), serum 
bilirubin should be repeated every 2–3 hours (to coincide with feedings) until levels fall, at 
which point serum bilirubin can be repeated every 8–12 hours. Phototherapy may be 
discontinued at serum bilirubin < 2 22–239 micromol/litre, and measuring serum bilirubin 
24 hours after stopping to check for rebound jaundice is optional.19 
The Israel Neonatal Society guidelines recommend that, for term and near -term babies 
(gestational age > 35 weeks), serum bilirubin measurement should be repeated at least twice 
daily depending on clinical judgement. Phototherapy should be discontinued at 205–
222 micromol/litre. In high- risk babies, serum bilirubin should be measured 12–24 hours after 
discontinuation of phototherapy.128 
Evidence summary 
Two studies from Israel show that establishing a priori  s erum bilirubin levels for discontinuation 
of phototherapy and of rebound jaundice did not make a  difference to clinical practice. The 
RCT of high and low threshold levels provided equal number s of rebound jaundice cases and 
did not lead to significant reduction in duration of phototherapy. While the uncontrolled study 
identified 30 cases of rebound jaundice (serum bilirubin > 256 micromol/litre), only 22 of 
these were considered by the clinician to need a second course of phototherapy.  

Neonatal jaundice 
104 
Existing guidelines vary in their recommendations on how frequently to monitor serum 
bilirubin, when to discontinue phototherapy and how often to monitor for rebound jaundice.  
GDG translation from evidence 
The evidence base was not adequate to inform the GDG regarding recommendations for 
monitoring of jaundice after discontinuation of phototherapy and checking for rebound. One 
good-quality study looked at discontinuation of phototherapy but used the Bhutani nomogram 
and was not relevant to UK practice. 
The RCTs reviewed in Section 7.2 generally adopted the practice of discontinuing phototherapy 
once the bilirubin levels w ere below the threshold value on two successive measurements. The 
GDG reached a consensus opinion. Consideration was given to the potential for rapidly rising 
bilirubin in the presence of haemolysis, and the interval between testing was determined with 
this in mind. Expert advice is that a threshold of 6 hours between tests allows safe differentiation 
between sequential results in order to measure a true rate of increase.  
The GDG recommends a se rum bilirubin level be taken 12–18 hours after stopping 
phototherapy to check for rebound jaundice, because of their decision (see  S ection 7.1.1) to 
stop phototherapy once bilirubin levels at least 50 micromol/l below the age -appropriate 
threshold are reached. This provides for a ‘safety net’ for measurement errors and to identify the 
occasional baby with increased bilirubin production even after apparently successful 
phototherapy.  
Threshold table Consensus-based bilirubin thresholds for the management of babies of 38 weeks or 
more gestational age with hyperbilirubinaemia 
Age (hours) Bilirubin measurement (micromol/litre) 
0   > 100 > 100 
6 > 100 > 112 > 125 > 150 
12 > 100 > 125 > 150 > 200 
18 > 100 > 137 > 175 > 250 
24 > 100 > 150 > 200 > 300 
30 > 112 > 162 > 212 > 350 
36 > 125 > 175 > 225 > 400 
42 > 137 > 187 > 237 > 450 
48 > 150 > 200 > 250 > 450 
54 > 162 > 212 > 262 > 450 
60 > 175 > 225 > 275 > 450 
66 > 187 > 237 > 287 > 450 
72 > 200 > 250 > 300 > 450 
78  > 262 > 312 > 450 
84  > 275 > 325 > 450 
90  > 287 > 337 > 450 
96+  > 300 > 350 > 450 
Action 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Repeat bilirubin 
measurement in  
6–12 hours 
Consider 
phototherapy and 
repeat bilirubin 
measurement in 
6 hours 
Start phototherapy Perform an exchange 
transfusion unless the 
bilirubin level falls 
below threshold while 
the treatment is being 
prepared 
 
 

Treatment 
105 
Recommendations – 7.1 How to manage hyperbilirubinaemia 
Use the bilirubin level to determine the management of hyperbilirubinaemia in all babies (see 
threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)). 
If the serum bilirubin level falls during continuous multiple phototherapy to a level 
50 micromol/litre below the threshold for which exchange transfusion is indicated:  
• step down to single phototherapy 
Starting phototherapy 
Use serum bilirubin measurement and the treatment thresholds in the threshold table 
(Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6) when considering the use of 
phototherapy.  
In babies with a gestational age of 38  w eeks or more whose bilirubin is in the ‘repeat 
bilirubin measurement’ category in the threshold table  (Section 1.3) repeat the bilirubin 
measurement in 6–12 hours.  
In babies with a gestational age of 38  w eek s or more whose bilirubin is in the ‘consider 
phototherapy’ category in the threshold table (Section 1.3) repeat the bilirubin measurement 
in 6 hours regardless of whether or not phototherapy has subsequently been started.  
Do not use phototherapy in babies  whose bilirubin does not exceed the phototherapy 
threshold levels in the threshold table (Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs 
(Section 1.6). 
During phototherapy 
During phototherapy: 
• r epeat serum bilirubin measurement 4–6 hours after initiating phototherapy 
• r epeat serum bilirubin measurement every 6–12 hours when the serum bilirubin level is 
stable or falling. 
Stopping phototherapy 
Stop phototherapy once serum bilirubin has fallen to a level at least 50 micromol/litre below 
the phototherapy threshold (see threshold table (Section  1.3) and treatment threshold graphs 
(Section 1.6)). 
Check for rebound of significant hyperbilirubinaemia with a repeat serum bilirubin 
measurement 12 –18 hours after stopping phototherapy. Babies do not necessarily have to 
remain in hospital for this to be done. 
 
For recommendations on starting and stopping exchange transfusions, see S ection 7.3. For 
recommendations on the use of other treatments, including IVIG, see Section 7.4. 
7.2 Phototherapy 
As there is a large evidence base for phototherapy , the literature search was restricted to RCTs 
and meta-analyses. Altogether , 472 records were identified by searches. These were screened 
and 140 hard-copy articles were requested. Seventy- five studies included information about the 
effect of phototherapy in combination with other treatments or were prophylaxis studies and 
were excluded at this stage. From the remaining studies, 42 RCTs were included. No RCT s 
dealing with sunlight or environmental light were found. 
To evaluate the evidence more clearly, conventional phototherapy was compared initially with 
no treatment, then with multiple phototherapy and finally with newer forms of phototherapy  
including fibreoptic and light- emitting diode (LED) phototherapy. Various aspects of 
phototherapy, such as choice of colour, whether given continuously or intermittently, and 
positioning of the baby, were also examined. Meta -analysis was performed to calculate the 
effectiveness of phototherapy using the program RevMan 5 ( www.cc-ims.net/revman). Where 
possible, a distinction was made between term and preterm  babies and evidence was evaluated 
accordingly. 

Neonatal jaundice 
106 
7.2.1 Type of phototherapy to use 
Phototherapy in term/normal-birthweight babies 
Nineteen of the included studies contributed to the following comparisons:  
● c onventional phototherapy versus usual care/no treatment (seven studies from six articles) 
● c onventional phototherapy versus multiple phototherapy (four studies) 
● c onventional phototherapy versus fibreoptic phototherapy (six studies) 
● c onventional phototherapy versus LED phototherapy (two studies). 
Conventional phototherapy versus no treatment 
Description of included studies 
Seven studies 129-134 from six articles with 667 participants were included in this comparison. 
One reference 129 included three separate groups each of which was randomly allocated to 
treatment or control.  Three of the studies were carried out in the USA 129;130;133 and one each in 
Italy,132 Taiwan134 and the UK.131 The evidence level of the included studies ranged from EL  1− 
to EL  1++. Three studies specified the method of randomisation used as a random numbers 
table,129;131 one study used a computer -generated sequence 133 and one used a coin- toss 
method.130 The remaining two studies did not report the method used. Two studies 129 reported 
using sealed envelopes as allocation concealment. 
Where reported, the mean and standard deviation for gestational age of the study participants 
ranged from 39.0 ± 0.8 weeks to 39.2 ± 0.9 weeks, mean birthweight ranged from 2155 ± 632 g 
to 3404 ± 361 g, mean age at entry to study ranged from 48.1 ± 14.7 hours to 97.2 ± 22.4 hours 
and mean baseline serum bilirubin levels ranged from 174 ± 40 micromol/litre to 
306 ± 12 micromol/litre. In the studies that reported gender, 377 participants (52%) were male.  
Review findings 
The results from a meta -analysis of these  studies showed that significantly fewer exchange 
transfusions were carried out in babies treated with conventional phototherapy (RR  0.36, 
95% CI 0.22 to 0.59) (Figure 7.1). Heterogeneity was within acceptable limits ( I² = 42%). The 
number needed to treat with phototherapy to prevent one exchange transfusion was 10. 
Figure 7.1  Number of exchange transfusions needed when conventional phototherapy is compared 
with no treatment in term babies 
Five studies 129;131;133;134 examined treatment failure as an outcome. This was defined as either 
two successive rises in serum bilirubin after initiation of phototherapy, serum bilirubin rising 
above predefined levels or the need for exchange transfusion. The RR was 0.37 (95%  CI 0.24 to 
0.58) (Figure 7.2). Heterogeneity was within acceptable limits (I² = 16%). 
Study or Subgroup
1.1.1 No treatment
F - Ju 1991
F - Lewis 1982
F - Martinez 1993
F - Meloni 1974
F - NICHHD 1985 a
F - NICHHD 1985 b
F - Sisson 1971
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 5.16, df = 3 (P = 0.16); I² = 42%
Test for overall effect: Z = 4.08 (P < 0.0001)
Events
0
0
0
2
3
14
0
19
Total
13
20
74
12
70
140
19
348
Events
0
0
0
6
18
23
5
52
Total
13
20
51
12
71
136
16
319
Weight
11.3%
33.6%
43.9%
11.2%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
Not estimable
Not estimable
Not estimable
0.33 [0.08, 1.33]
0.17 [0.05, 0.55]
0.59 [0.32, 1.10]
0.08 [0.00, 1.30]
0.36 [0.22, 0.59]
Phototherapy No treatment Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours Phototherapy Favours No treatment

Treatment 
107 
Figure 7. 2  Number of t reatment failures  when conventional photothe aray is compared with  no 
treatment in term babies 
Although only two studies 129 contributed data , there was a statistically significantly greater 
decrease in the mean serum bilirubin levels in the conventional phototherapy group compared 
with the no treatment group ( MD = −45.55 micromol/litre, 95% CI −46.35 to  
−44.75 micromol/litre) (Figure 7.3). There was significant heterogeneity (I² = 100%). 
Figure 7.3  Mean decrease in serum bilirubin when conventional phototherap y is compared with  
no treatment in term babies 
See below for the overall e vidence summary  and GDG translation from evidence  for 
phototherapy in term/normal-birthweight babies. 
Conventional phototherapy versus multiple phototherapy 
Description of included studies 
Four studies 135-138 with 328 participants were included but not all subjects were used in this 
comparison as some studies had additional treatment arms examining other types of 
phototherapy. Two of the studies were from Thailand, 136;137 one from Saudi Arabia 135 and one 
from Singapore.138 The evidence level of the included studies ranged from EL  1− to EL 1+. One 
study138 specified the method of randomisation used as the lottery method while the remaining 
three studies did not report the method used. One study 135 reported using sealed envelopes as 
allocation concealment. 
The mean gestational age of the study participants ranged from 37.9 ± 2.1 weeks to 
38.7 ± 1.3 weeks, the mean birthweight ranged from 2921 ± 696 g to 3130 ± 311 g, the mean 
age at entry to the study ranged from 37.9 ± 24.1 hours to 96.9 ± 30.9 hours (not reported in 
one study) and the mean baseline serum bilirubin levels ranged from 185 ± 56 micromol/litre to 
316 ± 47 micromol/litre. In all, 185 (56.4%) of participants were male. 
Review findings 
In a meta-analysis of these for studies, there were no cases of exchange transfusion or treatment 
failures and only three cases of rebound jaundice, two in the conventional phototherapy group 
and one in the multiple phototherapy group, but this difference  was not statistically significant. 
There was no statistically significant difference between the groups in terms of mean duration of 
phototherapy. 
Study or Subgroup
1.1.1 No treatment
F - Ju 1991
F - Lewis 1982
F - Martinez 1993
F - NICHHD 1985 a
F - NICHHD 1985 b
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 4.74, df = 4 (P = 0.31); I² = 16%
Test for overall effect: Z = 4.32 (P < 0.0001)
Events
0
0
6
3
14
23
Total
13
20
74
70
140
317
Events
4
3
11
18
23
59
Total
17
20
51
71
136
295
Weight
6.4%
5.7%
21.1%
29.0%
37.8%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.14 [0.01, 2.44]
0.14 [0.01, 2.60]
0.38 [0.15, 0.95]
0.17 [0.05, 0.55]
0.59 [0.32, 1.10]
0.37 [0.24, 0.58]
Phototherapy No treatment Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours Phototherapy Favours No treatment
Study or Subgroup
1.19.1 No treatment
F - Bryla 1985 a
F - Bryla 1985 b
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 649.54, df = 1 (P < 0.00001); I² = 100%
Test for overall effect: Z = 111.84 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
-94
-139
SD
5
4
Total
70
140
210
Mean
-32
-100
SD
4
4
Total
71
136
207
Weight
28.5%
71.5%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-62.00 [-63.50, -60.50]
-39.00 [-39.94, -38.06]
-45.55 [-46.35, -44.75]
Conventional Phototherapy Comparison Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours conventional Favours No treatment

Neonatal jaundice 
108 
Three studies 135-137 compared changes in serum bilirubin with each intervention. The mean 
decrease in serum  bilirubin was statistically significantly greater in the multiple phototherapy 
group (MD = 27.75 micromol/litre, 95% CI 14.50 to 41.00 micromol/litre) (Figure 7.4). 
Heterogeneity was significant (I² = 74%). 
Figure 7. 4  Mean decrease in serum bilirubin  when conventional phototherapy is compared with  
multiple phoptotherapy in term babies 
See below for the overall evidence summary and GDG translation from evidence for 
phototherapy in term/normal-birthweight babies. 
Conventional phototherapy versus fibreoptic phototherapy 
Description of included studies 
Six studies135;138-142 with 426 participants were included in this comparison. Two of the studies 
were from the USA 140;141 and there was one apiece from Italy ,142 Saudi Arabia,135 Singapore138 
and Turkey.139 The included studies ranged from EL  1− to EL 1+. Three studies specified the 
method of randomisation used as the lottery method, 138 computer-generated141 or sequential139 
and the remaining three studies did not report the method used. Two studies 135;142 reported 
using sealed envelopes as allocation concealment while in one study 139 the nurses who 
allocated the babies to the groups were blind to the serum bilirubin levels.  
Where reported, the mean gestational age ranged from 37.9 ± 2.1 weeks to 39.6 ± 1.6 weeks, 
mean birthweight ranged from 2921 ± 696 g to 3380 ± 359 g, mean age at entry to study ranged 
from 37.9 ± 24.1 hours to 105.4 ± 42.8 hours (not reported in two studies) and mean baseline 
serum bilirubin levels ranged from 185 ± 56 micromol/litre to 308 ± 47 micromol/litre. In th e 
studies that reported gender, 190 participants (55.4%) were male. 
Review findings 
No exchange transfusions were needed with either intervention. Two studies 138;139 reported on 
treatment failures, defined in one study 139 as having two successive rises in serum bilirubin after 
initiation of phototherapy, but not defined in the second. 138 Babies who received fibreoptic 
phototherapy were more likely to be considered as treatment failures ( RR 0.12, 95% CI 0.02 to 
0.92) (Figure 7.5). There was no heterogeneity (I² = 0%). 
Figure 7.5 Number of t reatment failure s when conventional phototherapy is compa red with 
fibreoptic phototherapy in term babies 
Study or Subgroup
1.1.2 Multiple phototherapy
F - Al-Alaiyan 1996
F - Boonyarittipong 2008
F - Nuntnarumit 2002
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 7.61, df = 2 (P = 0.02); I² = 74%
Test for overall effect: Z = 4.11 (P < 0.0001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
-14
-111
-98
SD
28
39
46
Total
15
30
27
72
Mean
-19
-144
-156
SD
35
36
67
Total
15
30
24
69
Weight
34.1%
48.7%
17.2%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
5.00 [-17.68, 27.68]
33.00 [14.01, 51.99]
58.00 [26.07, 89.93]
27.75 [14.50, 41.00]
Conventional Multiple Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Conventional Favours Multiple
Study or Subgroup
1.1.3 Fiberoptic
F - Sarici 2001
F - Tan 1997
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 0.00, df = 1 (P = 0.95); I² = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 2.05 (P = 0.04)
Events
0
0
0
Total
50
44
94
Events
4
7
11
Total
50
85
135
Weight
46.6%
53.4%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.11 [0.01, 2.01]
0.13 [0.01, 2.18]
0.12 [0.02, 0.92]
Conventional Fibreoptic Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours Conventional Favours Fibreoptic

Treatment 
109 
Three studies 135;138;139 reported on rebound jaundice , which was defined a s serum bilirubin 
returning to pre -phototherapy levels. Babies who received fibreoptic phototherapy had fewer 
cases of rebound jaundice but this was not statistically significant. 
All six studies reported the mean change in serum bilirubin. Babies in the conventional 
phototherapy group had a greater decrease in serum bilirubin than babies in the fibreoptic 
group (MD = −12.01 micromol/litre, 95% CI −14.03 to −9.99 micromol/litre) (Figure 7.6). 
Heterogeneity was within acceptable limits (I² = 36%). 
Figure 7.6  Mean decrease in serum bilirubin when conventional phototherapy is compared with 
fibreoptic phototherapy in term babies 
Three studies 135;138;139 reported the mean duration of phototherapy. Babies receiving 
conventional phototherapy spent statistically significantly less time undergoing phototherapy 
than babies receiving fibreoptic phototherapy ( MD = −12.30 hours, 95% CI −16.97 to  
−7.63 hours) but heterogeneity was a factor (I² = 72%) (Figure 7.7). 
Figure 7.7  Mean duration of phototherapy  when conventional phototherapy is compared with 
fibreoptic phototherapy in term babies 
See below for the overall evidence summary and GDG translation from evidence for 
phototherapy in term/normal-birthweight babies. 
Conventional phototherapy versus LED phototherapy 
Description of included studies 
Two studies from Israel 143;144 with 183 participants were included in this comparison. The 
evidence level of both studies was EL  1+. Both used computer -generated sequences as the 
method of randomisation but neither reported on allocation concealment.  
The mean gestational age in one study 144 was 39.5 ± 1.5 weeks but was not reported in the 
second143 although gestational age > 37 weeks was an inclusion criterion. The mean age in one 
study144 was 53.9 ± 37.8 hours and was not reported in the second. 143 Gender and mean 
birthweight were not reported in either study. The mean baseline serum bilirubin level was 
251 ± 74 micromol/litre in one study and 251 ± 77 micromol/litre in the second. 
Study or Subgroup
1.1.3 Fiberoptic
F - Al-Alaiyan 1996
F - Gale 1990
F - Holtrop 1992
F - Pezzati 2002
F - Sarici 2001
F - Tan 1997
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 7.79, df = 5 (P = 0.17); I² = 36%
Test for overall effect: Z = 11.66 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
-14
-10
-45
-55
-125
-109
SD
28
56
18
16
39
5
Total
15
22
14
21
50
44
166
Mean
23
-18
-28
-51
-111
-97
SD
39
54
20
23
42
7
Total
16
20
12
20
50
85
203
Weight
0.7%
0.4%
1.9%
2.7%
1.6%
92.7%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-37.00 [-60.79, -13.21]
8.00 [-25.28, 41.28]
-17.00 [-31.73, -2.27]
-4.00 [-16.18, 8.18]
-14.00 [-29.89, 1.89]
-12.00 [-14.10, -9.90]
-12.01 [-14.03, -9.99]
Conventional Fibreoptic Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Conventional Favours Fibreoptic
Study or Subgroup
1.1.2 Fiberoptic
F - Al-Alaiyan 1996
F - Sarici 2001
F - Tan 1997
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 7.07, df = 2 (P = 0.03); I² = 72%
Test for overall effect: Z = 5.16 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
52.8
49.4
62.6
SD
24.8
14.4
24.8
Total
15
50
44
109
Mean
47.5
61
84.8
SD
24.8
13.1
38.7
Total
16
50
85
151
Weight
7.1%
74.9%
18.0%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
5.30 [-12.17, 22.77]
-11.60 [-17.00, -6.20]
-22.20 [-33.22, -11.18]
-12.30 [-16.97, -7.63]
Conventional Fibreoptic Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Conventional Favours Fibreoptic

Neonatal jaundice 
110 
Review findings 
There were no reported cases of exchange transfusion, treatment failures or rebound jaundice in 
either study.  
In a meta -analysis, both studies reported the mean decrease in serum bilirubin, which did not 
differ statistically significantly between the groups (MD = −4.29 micromol/litre, 95% CI −18.95 
to 10.36 micromol/litre), with no heterogeneity (I ² = 0%). Likewise , there was no statistically 
significant difference in terms of mean duration of phototherapy ( MD = 0.64 hours, 95% CI 
−4.97 to 6.26 hours), with no heterogeneity (I² = 0%). 
Overall evidence summary for phototherapy in term/normal-birthweight babies 
No studies examining sunlight or environmental light for the treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia 
were identified. 
The pooled results of meta -analysis show that in hyperbilirubinaemia, conventional 
phototherapy is more effective than no treatment. Although there were variations in the initial 
serum bilirubin level at which treatment was initiated, conventional phototherapy was found  
statistically significantly  to de crease the risk of exchange transfusion and treatment failure. 
Treatment failure was defined as either two successive rises in serum bilirubin after initiation of 
phototherapy, serum bilirubin rising above predefi ned serum bilirubin levels or the need for 
exchange transfusion. There was also a statistically significantly greater decrease in the mean 
serum bilirubin levels with conventional phototherapy compared with no treatment. 
A statistically significant decrease in treatment failure was reported in babies who received 
conventional phototherapy compared with those receiving fibreoptic phototherapy. Similar 
results were seen for mean decreases in serum bilirubin, with results favouring conventional 
phototherapy. Conventional phototherapy was statistically significantly more effective than 
fibreoptic phototherapy in term babies. 
Compared with fibreoptic phototherapy, treatment failure was statistically significantly less 
common in babies receiving conventional phototherapy. Similarly , conventional photothera py 
was associated with a statistically significantly greater mean reduction in serum bilirubin than 
fibreoptic phototherapy. Specifically, conventional was statistically significantly more effective 
than fibreoptic phototherapy in term babies. 
There was a trend towards a greater decrease in serum bilirubin levels among the group treated 
with conventional phototherapy when compared with LED phototherapy but this was not 
statistically significant, and there was no difference between the two types of phototherapy in 
terms of the mean duration of phototherapy. 
Overall GDG translation from evidence for phototherapy in term/normal-
birthweight babies 
A formal cost- effectiveness analysis of the different modalities of phototherapy was not 
undertaken because the GDG did not believe  these represented realistic treatment alternatives. 
No evidence regarding sunlight was reviewed so the GDG cannot recommend sunlight as a 
treatment option for hyperbilirubinaemia. Fibreoptic phototherapy, which has  greater treatment 
failure, was not deemed a suitable treatment for term babies. While  the evidence suggests that 
multiple phototherapy is more effective than conventional phototherapy, advances in 
technology have rendered this characterisation less useful because modern phototherapy units 
are more powerful than those tested in the trials examined. Multiple phototherapy involves 
exposing a greater area of skin to more powerful irradiance and it is currently believed that this 
needs to be continuous. However, as a result of this, multiple phototherapy is also accompanied 
by more fluid balance problems. The GDG felt that further research was needed on LED 
phototherapy before they could be in a position to recommend it, although their clinical 
experience so far is that it is effective. 
Conventional modes of phototherapy, when used and maintained according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions, have a low adverse side effects profile and are effective as first- line 
medical treatment for hyperbilirubinaemia in term babies. Other modes of phototherapy are as 
effective as conventional phototherapy, with the exception of fibreoptic phototherapy , which is 

Treatment 
111 
less effective than conventional phototherapy in term babies and leads to more treatment 
failures. Monitoring the effect of treatment is essential because , despite phototherapy, some 
babies may require further medical interventions. 
Evidence demonstrates that multiple phototherapy is more effective than conventional 
phototherapy. However, conventional phototherapy works in most cases and, in order  to 
support breastfeeding, the GDG considers that multiple phototherapy should be reserved for the 
treatment of jaundice that does not respond to conventional treatment (no reduction in serum 
bilirubin 6 hours after initiation of treatment or serum bilirubin that continues to rise) or in cases 
that require a rapid reduction in serum bilirubin levels. 
Recommendations on phototherapy in term/normal-birthweight babies 
See the end of Section 7.2.1. 
Phototherapy in preterm/low-birthweight babies 
Seventeen of the included studies contributed to the following comparisons: 
● e arly phototherapy versus usual care/no treatment (seven studies) 
● c onventional phototherapy versus multiple phototherapy (two studies) 
● c onventional phototherapy versus fibreoptic phototherapy (six studies) 
● c onventional phototherapy versus LED phototherapy (two studies) 
Early phototherapy versus no treatment 
Description of included studies 
Seven studies 129;145-150 with 1238 participants were included in this comparison. Early 
phototherapy is used for lowering maximum bilirubin levels in babies with low birthweight 
(< 1500 g) and in preterm babies. Early phototherapy is initiated before serum bilirubin reaches 
the normal phototherapy threshold. 
Six of the studies 129;145-149 were from the USA and one was from Brazil.150 Babies were included 
either on the basis of gestational age 148 or birthweight.129;145-147;149;150 The evidence level of the 
included studies ranged from EL  1− to EL  1++. One study specified the method of  
randomisation used as a random numbers table ,129 one study used a computer -generated 
sequence145 and one reported using randomised cards ,148 while the remaining four  studies did 
not report the method used. One study129 used sealed envelopes for allocation concealment. 
Where reported, the mean and standard deviation for gestational age of the study participants 
ranged from 26.0 ± 2.0 weeks to 34.2 ± 3.8 weeks (not reported in three studies129;146;150), mean 
birthweight ranged from 777 ± 134 g to 1860 ± 344 g (not reported in two studies129;150), and 
mean age at entry to study was reported in one study 129 as 24.2 ± 8.0 hours. In two studies129;149 
phototherapy was initiated within 24 hours of birth, and the mean baseline serum bilirubin 
levels was 97 ± 33 micromol/litre in the one study 129 that reported. In the studies that reported 
gender, 1179 participants (51.5%) were male. 
Early phototherapy was initiated at varying serum bilirubin levels (e.g. 85.5 micromol/litre) or 
within 24 ± 12 hours of birth in low -birthweight babies. One study also used postnatal age, with 
phototherapy being initiated at 85 micromol/litre for the first week of life and at 
120 micromol/litre in the second week of life. In three studies145;149;150 babies in the control groups 
received phototherapy if their serum bilirubin levels reached an a priori cut-off of serum bilirubin. 
Review findings 
There were statistically significantly fewer exchange transfusions and treatment failures in babies 
treated with early phototherapy (RR 0.21, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.32) in the five studies129;145;148-150 that 
reported on these outcomes  (Figure 7.8). Most of the exchange transfusions were carried out in 
one study129 in which exchange transfusions were conducted at relatively low levels of serum 
bilirubin based on birthweight and risk profile. 129 The number needed to treat with early 
phototherapy to prevent one exchange transfusion was 16. 

Neonatal jaundice 
112 
Figure 7.8  Number of exchange transfusions needed when early phototherapy is compared with no 
treatment in preterm babies 
Four studies129;145;148;150 examined treatment failure as an outcome. Treatment failure was defined 
as serum bilirubin rising above a predefi ned level or the need for exchange transfusion. There 
were statistically significantly fewer treatment failures in babies treated with early phototherapy 
(RR 0.23, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.32) (Figure 7.9). Heterogeneity was a factor (I² = 53%). 
Figure 7.9  Number of treatment failures when early phototherapy is compared with no treatment in 
preterm babies 
The mean peak i n serum bilirubin was statistically significantly lower among babies who 
received early phototherapy ( MD = −53.11 micromol/litre, 95% CI −59.44 to 
−46.78 micromol/litre) (Figure 7.10) but heterogeneity was high (I² = 84%). 
Figure 7.10  Mean peak serum bilirubin when early phototherapy is compared with no treatment in 
preterm babies 
See below for the overall evidence summary and GDG translation from evidence for 
phototherapy in preterm/low-birthweight babies. 
Conventional phototherapy versus multiple phototherapy 
Description of included studies 
Two studies 151;152 of EL 1+ and with 206 participants were included in this comparison. One 
study apiece was from Italy 152 and the USA .151 One study 151 specified the method of 
Study or Subgroup
LBW - Leite 2004
LBW - NICHHD 1985
P - Curtis-Cohen 1985
P - Morris 2008
P - Wu 1974
Total (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 1.64, df = 1 (P = 0.20); I² = 39%
Test for overall effect: Z = 7.19 (P < 0.00001)
Events
0
22
0
2
0
24
Total
35
462
11
990
40
1538
Events
0
110
0
3
0
113
Total
35
460
11
984
40
1530
Weight
97.3%
2.7%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
Not estimable
0.20 [0.13, 0.31]
Not estimable
0.66 [0.11, 3.96]
Not estimable
0.21 [0.14, 0.32]
Experimental Control Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours experimental Favours control
Study or Subgroup
LBW - Leite 2004
LBW - NICHHD 1985
P - Morris 2008
P - Wu 1974
Total (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 6.39, df = 3 (P = 0.09); I² = 53%
Test for overall effect: Z = 8.75 (P < 0.00001)
Events
10
22
3
5
40
Total
35
462
990
80
1567
Events
21
110
13
14
158
Total
35
460
984
40
1519
Weight
12.9%
67.7%
8.0%
11.5%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.48 [0.26, 0.86]
0.20 [0.13, 0.31]
0.23 [0.07, 0.80]
0.18 [0.07, 0.46]
0.23 [0.17, 0.32]
Experimental Control Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours experimental Favours control
Study or Subgroup
1.1.1 No treatment
LBW - Leite 2004
LBW - Maurer 1973
LBW - NICHHD 1985
LBW - Valdes 1971
P - Curtis-Cohen 1985
P - Wu 1974
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 27.73, df = 5 (P < 0.0001); I² = 82%
Test for overall effect: Z = 16.44 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
84
83
110
58
112
125
SD
39
42
33
52
27
34
Total
35
37
462
19
11
80
644
Mean
147
147
170
140
123
161
SD
36
57
86
53
20
51
Total
35
15
460
15
11
40
576
Weight
13.0%
3.9%
56.6%
3.2%
10.2%
13.1%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-63.00 [-80.58, -45.42]
-64.00 [-95.86, -32.14]
-60.00 [-68.42, -51.58]
-82.00 [-117.58, -46.42]
-11.00 [-30.86, 8.86]
-36.00 [-53.47, -18.53]
-53.11 [-59.44, -46.78]
Early PT No treatment Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Early PT Favours No treatment

Treatment 
113 
randomisation used as a computer -generated sequence and the other study 152 used sealed 
envelopes for allocation concealment. 
The mean gestational ages of the study samples were 27.9 ± 1.4 weeks and 30.4 ± 2.7 weeks, the 
mean birthweights were 1019 ± 283 g and 1518 ± 419 g, the mean ages at entry to the study were 
38.3 ± 7.1 hours and 58 ± 25.8 hours, and the mean baseline serum bilirubin levels were 
109 ± 5 micromol/litre and 168 ± 49 micromol/litre. In all, 107 (51.9%) of participants were male. 
There were no statistically significant differences between the groups in terms of the number of 
exchange transfusions, number of treatment failures or frequency of rebound jaundice.  
Review findings 
As the two studies used different populations (preterm  and very p reterm) and different time -
points for measuring the change in serum bilirubin, it was not possible to pool the results. One 
study151 measured serum bilirubin at 18 hours after initiation of phototherapy and this showed 
no statistically significant difference between conventional phototherapy and multiple 
phototherapy. The second study ,152 which measured change in serum bilirubin over 72 hours, 
found a statistically significant difference in favour of multiple phototherapy 
(MD = 11.00 micromol/litre, 95% CI 9.01 to 12.99 micromol/litre). 
See below for the overa ll evidence summary and GDG translation from evidence for 
phototherapy in preterm/low-birthweight babies. 
Conventional phototherapy versus fibreoptic phototherapy 
Description of included studies 
Six studies152-157 with a total of 398 participants were included in this comparison. Four studies were 
carried out in Italy152;153;155;157 and one apiece in Australia156 and the Netherlands.154 The evidence 
level of all included studies was EL 1+. One study156 specified the method of randomisation used 
as the lottery method while the remaining five studies152-155;157 used sealed envelopes. 
Where reported, the mean gestational age ranged from 27.9 ± 1.4 weeks to 34.4 ± 1.2 weeks, 
mean birthweight ranged from 1019 ± 283 g to 2600 ± 382 g, mean age at entry to study ranged 
from 26.5 ± 15.0 hours to 63.2 ± 17.8 hours, and mean baseline serum bilirubin levels ranged 
from 94 ± 36 micromol/litre to 241 ± 9 micromol/litre. In the studies that reported gender, 162 
(54.1%) participants were male. 
Review findings 
In a meta -analysis of these six studies , t here was no statistically significant difference in the 
number of exchange transfusions carried out: only five babies who received conventional 
phototherapy and only seven babies who received fibreoptic phototherapy required exchange 
transfusions. There were no statistically significant differences for treatment failure (defined as 
requiring double phototherapy or reaching a predefined serum bilirubin level) between 
conventional and fibreoptic groups. No study reported cases of rebound jaundice.  
Three studies contributed data on the mean decrease in serum bilirubin: there was no 
statistically significant difference between the groups (MD = −1.17 micromol/litre, 95% CI 
−3.87 to 1.53 micromol/litre). There was no h eterogeneity (I² = 0%). Four studies contributed 
data on the mean duration of phototherapy and there was a statistically s ignificant difference 
between the groups in favour of fibreoptic phototherapy ( MD = 2.63 hours, 95% CI 0.69 to 
4.58 hours). There was no heterogeneity (I² = 0%). 
See below for the overall evidence summary and GDG translation from evidence for 
phototherapy in preterm/low-birthweight babies. 
Conventional phototherapy versus LED phototherapy 
Description of included studies 
Two studies 158;159 with 119 participants were included in this comparison. One study was 
carried out in Brazil 158 and the other in Italy.159 The evidence level in one study 158 was EL 1− 

Neonatal jaundice 
114 
and in the other 159 EL 1+. Neither study reported on the randomisation method. One study 159 
reported using sealed envelopes for allocation concealment. 
The mean gestational age s were 30.7 ± 2.0 weeks and 33.6 ± 1.9 weeks, the mean ages at time 
of entry to the study were 64.4 ± 15.2 hours and 68.1 ± 25.5 hours, the mean birthweights were 
1192 ± 238 g and 1998 ± 541 g, and the mean baseline serum bilirubin levels were  
180 ± 38 micromol/litre and 200 ± 16 micromol/litre. One study 158 reported gender and 58 
participants (65.9%) were male. 
Review findings 
There were no reported cases of exchange transfusions or treatment failures in either group. 
There were fewer cases of rebound jaundice in the conventional phototherapy group (eight  
versus 12) but this difference was not statistically significant. 
Phototherapy in both studies was terminated once a predefi ned seru m bilirubin level was 
reached so it was not possible to calculate the mean decrease in serum bilirubin. Babies in the 
LED phototherapy had a statistically significantly shorter duration of phototherapy 
(MD = −9.15 hours, 95% CI −3.53 to −14.77) but heterogeneity was high (I² = 90%). 
Overall evidence summary for phototherapy in preterm/low-birthweight babies 
The pooled results of meta -analysis indicate that phototherapy is effective in the treatment of 
hyperbilirubinaemia in preterm and low-birthweight babies. 
Babies who received early phototherapy had a statistically significant lower mean peak in serum 
bilirubin level. Early phototherapy was also  found to statistically significantly decrease the risk 
of exchange transfusion and treatment failure when compared with no treatment. However , in 
the study that  contributed most to this analysis , the exchange transfusion thresholds were  very 
cautious and would not be used in current clinical practice in the UK. 
Multiple phototherapy did not show any clinical difference  on any outcome when compared 
with conventional phototherapy. 
There was no statistically significant difference in the number of exchange transfusions or 
treatment failures in studies comparing fibreoptic with conventional phototherapy. Fibreoptic 
phototherapy was, however, statistically significantly better than conventional therapy in terms 
of duration of treatment. 
LED phototherapy was shown to shorten statistically significantly the duration of treatment 
compared with conventional phototherapy in preterm babies. Conversely , there was a trend 
towards a greater decrease in serum bilirubin levels among the group treated with conventional 
phototherapy but this was not statistically significant. 
Overall GDG translation from evidence for phototherapy in preterm/low-
birthweight babies 
All modes of phototherapy when used and maintained according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions are safe and effective as first- line medical treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia in 
preterm babies. 
The evidence supporting the use of early phototherapy in preterm babies is limited by the 
relatively low thresholds for exchange transfusion used in one study that contributed most to 
the analysis  and does not reflect current clinical practice  in the UK. Early initiation of 
phototherapy in preterm babies is effective in reducing the duration of phototherapy  and 
reducing peak bilirubin levels . The GDG is of the opinion that this evidence supports the 
choice of relatively low threshold levels for  starting phototherapy in preterm babies  based on 
the fomula given in Section 7.1.1. 
GDG experience is that fibreoptic devices are more acceptable to parents and nursing staff for a 
number of reasons, including less glare than from overhead lamps, the fact  that parents can hold 
and feed the baby, and that no eye protection is needed. However , fibreoptic phototherapy was 
less effective than conventional phototherapy in term babies. Monitoring the effect of treatment 
is essential because despite phototherapy some babies require further medical interventions. 

Treatment 
115 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 7.2.1. 
Bulb colour for conventional phototherapy 
Description of included studies 
Six studies160-165 with a total of 674 participants were included in this comparison. Two of the 
studies were from Denmark 160;161 and one apiece were from Greece,162 Italy,164 Switzerland163 
and the USA.165 The included studies ranged from EL 1− to EL 1+. One study163 used a random 
numbers table and one study160 used sealed envelopes for allocation concealment. 
One  study dealt with term 163 and three with preterm160;161;164 babies and as there were no 
statistically significant differences in outcome these were analysed together. Where reported, the 
mean gestational age ranged from 33.8 ± 2.49 weeks to 39.0 ± 1.03 weeks, the mean age at 
entry to study ranged from 70.5 ± 23.1 hours to 101.8 ± 4.32 hours, the mean birthweight 
ranged from 1930 g to 3395 ± 547 g, and the mean baseline serum bilirubin levels ranged from 
190 micromol/litre to 292 ± 35 micromol/litre. In all, 142 participants (55.5%) were male. 
Review findings 
Regarding duration of treatment, green phototherapy was statistically significantly shorter than 
blue phototherapy (MD = 7.03 hours, 95% CI 6.23 to 7.83 hours), which in turn was statistically 
significantly shorter than white phototherapy ( MD = −32.00 hours ( 95% CI −44.72 to 
−19.28 hours) (Figure 7.11). 
Figure 7.11  Mean duration of treatment when blue lamps are compared with green lamps and with 
white lamps 
Compared with blue phototherapy, there was a statistically significantly greater decrease in 
serum bilirubin levels among babies treated with green phototherapy 
(MD = 3.98 micromol/litre, 95% CI 3.43 to 4.52 micromol/litre), both in term and preterm 
babies (Figure 7.12). Turquoise phototherapy also resulted in a statistically significantly greater 
decrease in serum bilirubin levels ( MD = 14.00 micromol/litre, 95% CI 3.76 to 
24.24 micromol/litre). 
Evidence summary for bulb colour for conventional phototherapy 
Comparison between different types of coloured lights used for phototherapy reveals that green 
light phototherapy is statistically significantly better than blue light phototherapy in reducing the 
duration of treatment and in reducing the mean serum bilirubin levels. Results from one trial 
indicate that turquoise light phototherapy is better than blue light for the same two outcomes.  
Study or Subgroup
5.2.1 Blue versus Green
F - Amato 1991
F - Ayyash 1987
P - Ayyash 1987
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 44.33, df = 1 (P < 0.00001); I² = 98%
Test for overall effect: Z = 17.27 (P < 0.00001)
5.2.3 Blue versus White
F - Sisson 1972
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Not applicable
Test for overall effect: Z = 4.93 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 36.04, df = 1 (P < 0.00001), I² = 97.2%
Mean
34
49.88
53.29
43
SD
10
3.02
5.9
17.1
Total
15
100
31
146
48
48
Mean
70
42.68
53.26
75
SD
23
2.74
5.52
29.4
Total
15
100
31
146
24
24
Weight
0.4%
99.6%
0.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-36.00 [-48.69, -23.31]
7.20 [6.40, 8.00]
0.03 [-2.81, 2.87]
7.03 [6.23, 7.83]
-32.00 [-44.72, -19.28]
-32.00 [-44.72, -19.28]
Blue Comparator Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-50 -25 0 25 50
Favours Blue Favours Green

Neonatal jaundice 
116 
Figure 7.12  Mean decrease in serum bilirubin  when blue lamps are compared with green lamps 
and with white lamps 
GDG translation from evidence for bulb colour for conventional phototherapy 
The GDG recognises that the colour of the phototherapy lamps is important and that green light 
is the most effective in reducing serum bilirubin. It is not, however, well tolerated by clinical 
staff. Phototherapy units that combine white with blue light are ‘easier on the eyes ’ and are 
better tolerated by clinical staff. These may also be more acceptable to parents.  
 
Recommendations – 7.2.1 Type of phototherapy to use 
Do not use sunlight as phototherapy for hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Single phototherapy treatment for term babies 
Use conventional ‘blue light’ phototherapy as treatment for significant hyperbilirubinaemia in 
babies with a gestational age of 37 weeks or more unless:  
• the serum bilirubin level is rising rapidly (more than 8.5 micromol/litre per hour) 
• the serum bilirubin is at a level that is within 50 micromol/litre below the threshold for 
which exchange transfusion is indicated after 72 hours (see the threshold table 
(Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)).  
Do not use fibreoptic phototherapy as first- line treatment for hyperbilirubinaemia for babies 
with a gestational age of 37 weeks or more. 
Ensure all equipment is maintained and used according to the manufacturers’ guidelines.  
Single phototherapy treatment for preterm babies 
Use either fibreoptic phototherapy or conventional ‘blue light’ phototherapy as  treatment for 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia in babies less than 37 weeks unless:  
• the serum bilirubin level is rising rapidly (more than 8.5 micromol/litre per hour) 
• the serum bilirubin is at a level that is within 50 micromol/litre below the threshold for 
which exchange transfusion is indicated after 72 hours (see treatment threshold table 
(Section 1.3) and treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)). 
Continuous multiple phototherapy treatment for term and preterm babies 
Initiate continuous multiple phototherapy to treat all babies if any of the following apply:  
• the serum bilirubin level is rising rapidly (more than 8.5 micromol/litre per hour) 
• the serum bilirubin is at a level within 50 micromol/litre below the threshold for which 
exchange transfusion is indicated after 72 hours (see threshold table (Section 1.3) and 
treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)). 
• the bilirubin level fails to respond to single phototherapy (that is, the level of serum 
bilirubin continues to rise, or does not fall, within 6 hours of starting single phototherapy) 
 
 
Study or Subgroup
5.1.1 Blue versus Green
F - Amato 1991
F - Ayyash 1987
P - Ayyash 1987
P - Vecchi 1986
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 1.76, df = 3 (P = 0.62); I² = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 14.26 (P < 0.00001)
5.1.2 Blue versus Turquoise
P - Ebbesen 2007
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Not applicable
Test for overall effect: Z = 2.68 (P = 0.007)
Test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 3.67, df = 1 (P = 0.06), I² = 72.8%
Mean
-157
-39
-34
-50
-78
SD
22
2
6
23
31
Total
15
100
31
42
188
69
69
Mean
-154
-43
-38
-48
-92
SD
31
2
8
26
31
Total
15
100
31
42
188
72
72
Weight
0.1%
97.2%
2.4%
0.3%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-3.00 [-22.24, 16.24]
4.00 [3.45, 4.55]
4.00 [0.48, 7.52]
-2.00 [-12.50, 8.50]
3.98 [3.43, 4.52]
14.00 [3.76, 24.24]
14.00 [3.76, 24.24]
Conventional Comparison Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Conventional Favours Comparison

Treatment 
117 
Research recommendations 
What is the clinical and cost-effectiveness of: 
● LED phototherapy compared to conventional phototherapy in term and preterm babies 
with significant hyperbilirubinaemia? 
Why this is important 
Existing research has shown that while there is no difference between LED phototherapy and 
conventional photothe rapy, LED phototherapy may be easier to use in clinical setting by 
reducing the need for additional fluids. New randomised controlled trials are needed to 
examine LED phototherapy. Population: Term and preterm  babies with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 28 days of life. Interventions: LED phototherapy compared 
with fiberoptic phototherapy or conventional phototherapy. Outcome: Effectiveness in terms 
of the mean decrease in bilirubin levels and the mean duration of phototherapy. Extra 
outcomes should include adverse effects, parental bonding and parental anxiety, staff and 
parental satisfaction with treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009  
● fibreoptic phototherapy using large pads compared to conventional phototherapy in 
term babies with significant hyperbilirubinaemia? 
Why this is important 
Existing research has demonstrated the effectiveness of fiberoptic phototherapy in p reterm 
babies but not in term babies. This is due to that fact that existing fiberoptic pads are small and 
cannot ensure adequate skin coverage in larger babies. New devices using larger pads may be 
effective in term babies. New randomised controlled trials are needed to examine fiberoptic 
phototherapy which uses larger pads. Population: Term babies with signific ant 
hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 28 days of life. Interventions: Fiberoptic phototherapy with 
larger pads compared with conventional phototherapy. Outcome: Effectiveness in terms of 
mean decrease in bilirubin levels and mean duration of phototherapy. Extra outcomes should 
include adverse effects, family adjustment, breastfeeding effects, parental bonding and anxiety, 
staff and parental satisfaction with treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
 
7.2.2 General care of the baby during phototherapy 
Fixed position versus changing positions 
Description of included studies 
Three studies 166-168 with 133 participants were included in this comparison but not all studies 
contributed data to each analysis. One study apiece was from Iran, 168 [EL 1−] Israel166 [EL 1+] 
and Taiwan. 167 [EL 1+]  No study reported the method of randomisation although two 
studies166;167 used sealed envelopes for allocation concealment. 
All three studies  included only term babies. Where  reported, the mean gestational age ranged 
from 38.1 ± 1.0 weeks to 38.2 ± 1.14 weeks, the mean age at study entry ranged from 
104.2 ± 48.5 hours to 143.4 ± 48.5 hours, the mean birthweight ranged from 3137 ± 384 g to 
3500 ± 478 g, and the mean baseline serum bilirubin levels ranged from 
320 ± 17 micromol/litre to 321 ± 39 micromol/litre. For the two studies 166;167 that reported 
gender, 27 of 81 participants (33.3%) were male. 
Review findings 
There was a trend (not statistically significant) in favour of a fixed supine position as regards the 
mean duration of treatment (MD = −6.67 hours, 95% CI −13.50 to 0.15 hours) (Figure 7.13). 
A similar trend was also reported for mean change in serum bilirubin 
(MD = −5.98 micromol/litre, 95% CI −14.79 to 2.82 micromol/litre) (Figure 7.14). 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
118 
Figure 7.13  Mean duration of treatment when fixed supine position is compared with changing the 
baby’s position 
Figure 7.14  Mean change in serum bilirubin  when fixed supine position is compared with 
changing the baby’s position 
Evidence summary 
There was a  trend (not statistically significant) in favour of a fixed supine position for mean 
duration of treatment and mean decrease in serum bilirubin in reviewed studies.  
GDG translation from evidence 
The GDG accepts that, in term babies, the position of the baby during phototherapy has no 
significant influence on duration of phototherapy or mean change in serum bilirubin. No studies 
in preterm babies were identified. To ensure consistent advice regarding  the risk of sudden 
infant death syndrome, babies should be placed in a supine position. 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 7.2.2. 
Eye coverings 
Description of included studies 
Two studies, reported in three publications ,169-171 with 241 participants were eligible for this 
comparison but only one 170 (comparing eye patches with a tinted headbox) contributed 
outcome data. One study 169;170 was from Hong Kong and the other was from Italy .171 The 
evidence level of one study 169;170 was EL 1+ as a computer -generated sequence was used to 
allocate babies into the two groups. The second study 171 was rated EL 1− as neither the method 
of randomisation or allocation concealment was reported. 
The mean gestational age from this study169;170 was 38.6 ± 2.6 weeks, the mean age at entry to study 
was 89.5 ± 27.6 hours, the mean birthweight was  3087 ± 611 g, and the mean  baseline serum 
bilirubin level was 258 ± 27 micromol/litre. In this study, 106 participants (52.2%) were male. 
Review findings 
There were statistically significantly more cases of purulent eye discharge among the eye 
patches group compared with the headbox group (RR 2.53, 95% CI 1.23 to 5.20) (Figure 7.15). 
Similarly, there were more features of conjunctivitis among the eyepatch group (RR  6.44, 
95% CI 1.49 to 27.80). (Figure 7.16) 
Study or Subgroup
3.1.1 Supine versus changing positions
F - Chen 2002
F - Mohammadzadeh 2004
F - Shinwell 2002
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 0.15, df = 2 (P = 0.93); I² = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 1.33 (P = 0.18)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
-128
-68
-115
SD
55
27
23
Total
24
25
16
65
Mean
-127
-62
-108
SD
45
22
11
Total
27
25
14
66
Weight
10.0%
41.6%
48.4%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-1.00 [-28.79, 26.79]
-6.00 [-19.65, 7.65]
-7.00 [-19.66, 5.66]
-5.98 [-14.79, 2.82]
Conventional Comparison Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Conventional Favours Comparison
Study or Subgroup
3.2.1 Supine versus changing position
F - Chen 2002
F - Shinwell 2002
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 3.15, df = 1 (P = 0.08); I² = 68%
Test for overall effect: Z = 1.92 (P = 0.06)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
53.3
28
SD
17.9
9
Total
24
16
40
Mean
52.8
40
SD
20.2
15
Total
27
14
41
Weight
42.6%
57.4%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
0.50 [-9.96, 10.96]
-12.00 [-21.01, -2.99]
-6.67 [-13.50, 0.15]
Fixed supine Changing position Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-50 -25 0 25 50
Favours Fixed supine Favours Changing position

Treatment 
119 
Figure 7.15  Purulent eye discharge when the use of eye patches is compared with headboxes 
Figure 7.16  Features of conjunctivitis when the use of eye patches is compared with headboxes 
Evidence summary 
One RCT reported fewer cases of purulent eye discharge and conjunctivitis among babies 
nursed in a headbox while receiving phototherapy compared with those using eye patches. 
GDG translation from evidence 
While headboxes led to fewer eye problems in one study , the GDG feels that, if appropriate eye 
protection and care are given, either eye patches or headboxes can be used when conventional 
phototherapy is being used with term babies. During multiple phototherapy , tinted headboxes 
are not recommended because the head constitutes a significant proportion of the baby’s sk in 
surface, which needs to be exposed to phototherapy for it to be effective.  
There were no studies of headboxes in preterm babies and the GDG concluded that, unless the 
preterm baby is being treated with fibreoptic phototherapy , appropriate eye protection and eye 
care should be given, and tinted headboxes should not be used. 
 
Recommendations – 7.2.2 General care of the baby during phototherapy 
During phototherapy: 
• place the baby in a supine position unless other clinical conditions prevent this  
• ensure treatment is applied to the maximum area of skin  
• monitor the baby’s temperature and ensure the baby is kept in an environment that will 
minimise energy expenditure (thermoneutral environment)  
• monitor hydration by daily weighing of the baby and assessing wet nappies  
• support parents and carers and encourage them to interact with the baby  
Give the baby eye protection and routine eye care during phototherapy.  
Use tinted headboxes as an alternative to eye protection in babies with a gestational age of 
37 weeks or more undergoing conventional ‘blue light’ phototherapy. 
 
Study or Subgroup
4.3.1 Eye patches versus headbox
F - Fok 1995
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Not applicable
Test for overall effect: Z = 2.53 (P = 0.01)
Events
23
23
Total
102
102
Events
9
9
Total
101
101
Weight
100.0%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
2.53 [1.23, 5.20]
2.53 [1.23, 5.20]
Eye patches Headbox Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.02 0.1 1 10 50
Favours Eye patches Favours Headbox
Study or Subgroup
4.2.1 Eye patches versus Headbox
F - Fok 1995
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Not applicable
Test for overall effect: Z = 2.49 (P = 0.01)
Events
13
13
Total
102
102
Events
2
2
Total
101
101
Weight
100.0%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
6.44 [1.49, 27.80]
6.44 [1.49, 27.80]
Eye patches Headbox Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.02 0.1 1 10 50
Favours Eye patches Favours Headbox

Neonatal jaundice 
120 
7.2.3 Feeding and hydration during phototherapy 
Interupting phototherapy for feeding – intermittent versus continuous phototherapy 
Description of included studies 
Two studies 172;173 ( n = 110) contributed to this analysis, each comparing continuous 
phototherapy with various intermittent regimens. One study 172 was from Hong Kong and one 173 
from the USA. The evidence level of both studies was EL 1 −. Neither study reported the 
method of randomisation or allocation concealment. 
Data from the various intermittent regimens were combined. Respectively the mean gestational 
ages were 34.7 ± 2.0 weeks173 and 39.9 ± 1.5 weeks,172 the mean age at entry to study was 
56.8 ± 10.8 hours in one study 173 and not reported in the second, the mean birthweight was 
1836 ± 299 g173 and 3229 ± 394 g,172 and the mean baseline serum bilirubin levels were 
150 ± 19 micromol/litre173 and 198 ± 25 micromol/litre.172 Gender was not reported. One study 
each dealt with term172 and preterm173 babies. 
Review findings 
There was a  difference (not statistically significant) between the two groups in favour of 
continuous phototherapy (MD = −6.97 hours, 95% CI −26.31 to 12.38 hours) (Figure 7.17). 
Figure 7.17  Mean duration of treatment when continuous phototherapy is compared with 
intermittent phototherapy 
Evidence summary 
Two RCTs, one in term babies and one in preterm babies, examined continuous phototherapy 
versus intermittent photothera py, with phototherapy being initiated at low serum bilirubin 
levels. No statistically significant difference was found for any of the reported outcomes. No 
studies have examined intermittent phototherapy at moderate or high levels of serum bilirubin 
so we were unable to examine any evidence on the effectiveness of intermittent phototherapy at 
moderate or high serum bilirubin levels. 
GDG translation from evidence 
The GDG notes that there was no difference between continuous and intermittent phototherapy 
on either the duration of phototherapy or the mean change in serum bilirubin when initiated at 
low serum bilirubin levels. 
Interrupting phototherapy at low bilirubin levels does not hinder the baby’s treatment. The 
GDG supports brief interruptions of phototherapy treatment to facilitate breastfeeding and 
cuddles. These interruptions can be used by healthcare professionals to support parents and 
carers and encourage them to interact with the baby . This may help to reduce the anxiety and 
stress for both parents and babies caused by phototherapy. 
The GDG notes that there is no evidence to support the safe use of intermittent phototherapy at 
moderate or high levels of serum bilirubin. 
The GDG concluded that multiple phototherapy should be continuous and that other t ypes of 
phototherapy can be interrupted (see also Sections 7.1.1 and 7.1.2.) 
Study or Subgroup
2.1.1 Continuous versus Intermittent
F - Lau 1984
P - Vogl 1978
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 0.03, df = 1 (P = 0.87); I² = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 0.71 (P = 0.48)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
89.9
64
SD
54.2
50
Total
13
26
39
Mean
94.3
72
SD
48.8
45
Total
21
50
71
Weight
28.7%
71.3%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-4.40 [-40.51, 31.71]
-8.00 [-30.91, 14.91]
-6.97 [-26.31, 12.38]
Continuous Intermittent Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-20 -10 0 10 20
Favours Continuous Favours Intermittent

Treatment 
121 
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 7.2.3. 
Additional fluids/feeds during phototherapy 
Clinical question 
Is it beneficial to give additional fluids (cup feeds, fluids) during treatment with phototherapy?  
What is the effectiveness of nutritional support and/or rehydration during treatment with 
phototherapy in babies with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
– o ral – top up milk feeds by bottle/cup/spoon or other liquids (water/juice) 
– p arenteral feeds 
The electronic searches ( which were not restricted by study methodology) identified 1831 
references al though the majority were excluded on the basis of title and abstract. The main 
reasons for exclusion at this stage were either that the reference dealt with a non- interventional 
study or that feeding was not the intervention being examined but was mentioned in passing.  
Of the 20 references that were requested as hard- copy articles, four were included and 16 were 
excluded for the following r easons: babies were not jaundiced (five  studies), not randomised  
(five studies), no clear intervention (four studies), comparison of phototherapy with interruption 
of breastfeeding (one study), and the comparison of hospital routines which included feeding  
(one study). 
The included studies were divided into two groups: one group dealt with fluids or feeds given in 
combination with phototherapy and the other dealt with additional fluids or feeds as 
interventions to minimise the rise in serum bilirubin and reduce the need for phototherapy.  
Description of included studies 
Four RCTs (n = 278) dealt with additional fluids or feeds alongside phototherapy for the 
treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia. Two studies used computer -generated133 or block 
randomisation174 and two studies 174;175 used sealed envelopes to conceal allocation. Where 
reported, the mean birthweight of the samples ranged from 2936 ± 473 g to 3404 ± 361 g, the 
mean gestational age ranged from 37.6 ± 0.9 weeks to 39.4 ± 0.9 weeks, the mean age at entry 
to the study ranged from 95 ± 17.7 hours to 139 ± 47 hours, and the mean serum bilirubin 
levels ranged from 254 ± 22 micromol/litre to 377 ± 66 micromol/litre. Of the combined 
sample, 188 participants (67.6%) were male. 
Review findings 
The first RCT( n = 74), from India ,174 compared giving extra fluids to babies undergoing 
phototherapy with a control group receiving standard hydration. Babies in the ‘extra fluids’ 
group received intravenous fluid supplementation with 1/5 normal saline in 5% dextrose for a 
period of 8 hours before phototherapy. Standard care consisted of conventional phototherapy 
combined with 30 ml /kg per day of extra oral feeds (expressed breast milk or formula) until 
phototherapy was discontinued. Subjects were randomised in stratified blocks according to 
serum bilirubin levels at entry to the study. Sealed envelopes were used to conceal the 
allocation. Statistically s ignificantly more  exchange transfusions were needed among babies 
receiving standard hydration ( RR 3.3, 95% CI 1.51 to 7.35). The ‘extra fluids’ group also 
showed a statistically significantly greater mean r eduction in serum bilirubin 
(MD = 26 micromol/litre, 95% CI 10.60 to 41.40 micromol/litre) over 24 hours and a shorter  
duration of phototherapy (MD = 21 hours, 95% CI 9.45 to 32.55 hours). [EL 1++] 
The second RCT(n = 54), from Malaysia,175 also examined the supplementation of phototherapy 
and enteral feeds with intravenous fluids. All babies received daily maintenance fluids at 
90 ml/kg on day 2, 120 ml/kg on day 3 and 150 ml/kg per day from day  4 onwards. They were 
also given an additional 10% of their respective total daily fluid requirement to compensate for 
fluid loss during phototherapy. The enteral feeds group was given eight  divided feeds at 3-hour 
intervals. Breastfed babies were fed on demand. In addition, the breastfed babies were given 
half the volume of formula feeds that formula-fed babies received. In the intravenous group, 

Neonatal jaundice 
122 
babies were given half of their daily fluid requirement as eight divided feeds at 3- hour intervals. 
The remaining half of their daily fluid requirement was given as continuous intravenous 1/5 
normal saline and 5% dextrose infusion. Blinding was not reported but subjects were stratified 
by serum bilirubin level, hydration status and usual type of feed before randomisation. Sealed 
envelopes were used to conceal the allocation. Fewer babies in the un- supplemented group 
needed an exchange transfusion but this difference was not statistically significant. There was a 
greater decrease in serum bilirubin in the babies given supplemental intravenous fluids, but 
again this difference was not statistically significant. [EL 1+] 
An RCT (n = 125) carried out in Argentina 133 compared conventional phototherapy combined 
with either breastfeeding (usual care) or with formula feeds. No information was given on the 
contents of the formula feeds. Blinding was not reported although subjects were randomised 
using a computer -generated sequence of numbers. There was no statistically significant 
difference between the two groups in mean decrease in serum bilirubin over the 48 hours of 
phototherapy. [EL 1+] 
The final RCT( n = 25), from Thailand, 176 compared the effect on serum bilirubin of different 
types of formula feeds in combination with phototherapy. The formula feed Enfamil® was 
compared with the lactose -free formula Enfamil ProSobee ®. These feeds have compatible 
energy, carbohydrate, fat and mineral content: Enfamil ProS obee has a slightly higher protein 
content that Enfamil. Babies were fed with 3 ounces of formula eight  times a day over 7 2 hours 
of conventional phototherapy. Blinding and randomisation methods were not reported. There 
was no statistically significant difference between the types of formula in mean decrease in 
serum bilirubin during phototherapy. [EL 1−] 
Evidence summary 
Evidence from good- quality RCTs [ EL 1+ or EL 1++] on the effectiveness of the addition of 
intravenous fluids to phototherapy shows  contrasting results. One study showed  that fewer 
babies given additional intravenous fluids during phototherapy needed exchange transfusion, 
they have a greater reduction in mean serum bilirubin, and need shorter duration of 
phototherapy compared with babies given only enteral feeds. The second study did not confirm 
these findings. 
In one EL I− RCT, formula feeds was no more effective than breastfeeding in reducing serum 
bilirubin during phototherapy. In another study, lactose -containing formula was no more 
effective than lactose-free formula during phototherapy. 
No studies examining additional fluids in preterm  babies receiving phototherapy were 
identified. 
GDG translation from evidence 
Additional fluids given to term babies receiving phototherapy shorten the duration of treatment 
and reduce the number of exchange transfusions required. However , the GDG considers that 
the automatic prescription of additional fluids when phototherapy is initiated is not warranted as 
this can hinder successful breastfeeding. The NICE guideline on ‘Postnatal care’ recommends 
that ‘breastfed babies should not be routinely supplemented with formula, water or dextrose 
water for the treatment of jaundice ’ ( www.nice.org.uk/CG37). All the studies examined were 
performed before modern LED phototherapy devices were developed, devices which are 
claimed to reduce fluid losses. The GDG’s opinion is that the need for additional fluids during 
phototherapy should be considered on an individual clinical basis. If additional fluids are 
indicated, the GDG supports maternal expressed breast milk as the additional fluid of choice.  
Recommendations 
See the end of Section 7.2.3. 
Adverse effects of phototherapy 
Several concerns have been raised about the immediate and long -term potential adverse effects 
of phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. 

Treatment 
123 
Description of included studies 
Thirteen  studies177-189 of varying quality (EL  2− to EL 1++) from France ,181;182 Israel,186;189 the 
Netherlands,187 Sweden,180 Thailand,185;188 Turkey 178;179;183 and the USA177;184 were identified. 
Review findings 
DNA damage 
A non-systematic review of in vivo studies177 demonstrated that phototherapy had DNA -
modifying properties that could induce genetic and carcinogenic effects. [EL 1+].  
A second study from Turkey 178 examined the effects on DNA in 33 term babies who receive d 
phototherapy for jaundice compared with 14 otherwise healthy controls with jaundice who did 
not receive  phototherapy. There were no significant differences between the groups at entry. 
The mean gestational age was 39.3 ± 0.9 weeks, the mean birthweight was 3021 ± 450 g, and 
the mean age at entry was 113 ± 46 hours. Twenty-nine (61.7%) of the sample were male. 
Phototherapy was applied using a standard Air -Shields unit with four 18 W blue -fluorescent 
tubes and two 18 W white fluorescent tubes. The light range was between 480 and 520 nm and 
the irradiance was 12 microwatt/cm² per nm. DNA was collected and analysed according to 
standard practice. Images of 100 randomly selected cells were analysed visually. Each image 
was classified according to the intensity of fluorescence in the comet tail (which is caused if a 
damaged cell is exposed to an electric current – the cell fragments get drawn out into a comet 
tail) and given a value of 0, 1, 2, 3 or  4 (from undamaged (class 0) to maximally damaged (class 
4)) so that the total score of a slide could be between 0 and 400 arbitrary units. The mean DNA  
damage scores were statistically significantly different between the groups: 58.4 ± 3.2 for the 
phototherapy group and 23.1 ± 4.9 for the control group. [EL 2−] 
A second study, from Turkey179 also examined the effects on DNA in 46 term babies who received 
phototherapy (23 each received conventional and intensive phototherapy) for jaundice compared 
with 19 otherwise healthy controls with jaundice who did not receive  phototherapy. The 
gestational age ranged from 38 to 41 weeks and age at entry was between 3 and 10 days. No other 
demographic details were reported. Phototherapy was applied using a standard Bili Crystal® unit 
with either six 20 W white fluorescent tubes placed 45 cm above the baby or , for intensive 
phototherapy, twelve 20 W white fluorescent tubes placed 20 cm above the baby. The irradiance 
was 12–16 microwatt/cm² per nm for conventional phototherapy and 30–34 microwatt/cm² per nm 
for intensive phototherapy. DNA was collected and analysed according to standard practice. 
Images of 100 randomly selected cells were analysed visually. Each image was classified using the 
same methods as the previous study. The mean DNA damage scores were statistically significantly 
different between the groups : 32 ± 9 for the intensive phototherapy group, 28 ± 9 for the 
conventional phototherapy group and 21 ± 10 for the control group (P < 0.001). [EL 2−] 
Malignant melanoma 
A matched c ase–control study180 from Sweden retrospectively examined the risk of developing 
malignant melanoma after treatment with phototherapy for neonatal jaundice. The hospital 
records of 30 adolescents with malignant melanoma were compared with the records of 120 
controls matched for date of birth, hospital and gender. No statistically significant risk of 
developing childhood malignant melanoma after phototherapy of babies with 
hyperbilirubinaemia was found. [EL 2−] 
A second study 181 examined data from an RCT of photoprotection educational programme s for 
8- to 9-year-old children in France. From a total of 828 children participating, 180 (22%) had 
been exposed to neonatal blue  light phototherapy. A melanocytic naevus count was conducted 
by a nurse who was unaware of the childrens’ history of exposure to phototherapy. Naevus size 
on exposed body parts (arms and back) was recorded as < 2 mm, 2–5 mm or > 5 mm. 
Children who had received phototherapy showed no statistically significant difference in naevus 
counts than those who had not. [EL 1+] 
A small c ase–control study from France 182 assessed the role of blue light phototherapy used to 
treat hyperbilirubinaemia on naevus acquisition in children aged 8–9 years. A total of 58 
children were included, of whom 18 (31%) had received phototherapy. The children were 
examined by a dermatologist and naevus size was recorded as < 2 mm, 2–5 mm or > 5 mm. 

Neonatal jaundice 
124 
Univariate analysis indicated that the number of naevi > 2 mm was higher in the exposed 
group (3.5 ± 3.05 for exposed children versus 1.45 ± 1.99 for unexposed children). After 
stratification for classic clinical risk factors (age, skin types I and II, medium coloured or light 
skin, fair hair and light eye colour), the association between phototherapy exposure and naevus 
size 2 mm or larger was statistically significant (P = 0.003). [EL 2−] 
Trans-epidermal water loss 
A case –control study from Thailand 185 examined trans -epidermal water loss (TEWL ) during 
phototherapy in term babies. A group of 40 babies with non- haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia 
was compared with 40 healthy controls. The mean gestational age was 39.0 ± 1.2 weeks and 
the mean birthweight was 3166 ± 435 g. The mean serum bilirubin of the babies rec eiving 
phototherapy was 248 ± 15 micromol/litre. In all, 44 (55%) of the sample were male. Babies 
received conventional phototherapy in an open crib. TEWL increased by 16.7% after 6 hours of 
phototherapy. This was statistically significantly higher than the rate of loss in control babies not 
requiring phototherapy. [EL 2−] 
Another case series, from Israel, 186 examined TEWL during phototherapy in preterm  babies. The 
study included 31 babies, of whom 15 (48%) were males, with a mean gestational age of 
31.2 weeks and a mean birthweight of 1447 g. Babies with respiratory distress, sepsis and those 
requiring ventilatory support were excluded. Babies were nursed naked except for eye patches 
in incubators and received conventional phototherapy (Air -Shields Micro- Lite). The mean 
increase in TEWL was 26.4%. [EL 3] 
A second case series , from the Netherlands ,187 examined TEWL in preterm babies during 
phototherapy with halogen lamps. This study included 18 babies with a mean gestational age of 
30.6 ± 1.6 weeks and a mean birthweight of 1412 ± 256 g who received phototherapy for non-
haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia. Babies with metabolic disorders and serious skin lesions were 
excluded. Phototherapy was applied using a single -quartz lamp (Ohmeda Bililight) positioned 
55 cm above the baby with an irradiance of 12.5 microwatt/cm² per nm. There was an increase 
of 21.3% in TEWL after 1 hour of phototherapy with halogen lamps. [EL 3] 
An RCT in Thailand188 evaluated the effect of application of a clear topical ointment on TEWL in 
preterm babies receiving phototherapy. In this study, 40 babies (22 (55%) were male) with a 
mean gestational age of 33.1 ± 2.6 weeks, a mean birthweight of 1443 ± 196 g and a mean 
serum bilirubin of 171 ± 39 micromol/litre were randomised to receive phototherapy and 
topical ointment or phototherapy alone. The ointment was a 1 : 1 mixture of Vaseline ® and 
liquid paraffin. After 5 hours, mean TEWL decreased by 13.8% in the group that received 
ointment but increased by 14.1 % in the control group. There was no statistically significant 
difference between the groups in pre- and post-phototherapy serum bilirubin levels. [EL 1−] 
Heart-rate variability 
A controlled before and after study from Israel 189 examined the effects of phototherapy on 
cardiovascular function. Thirty term babies with Apgar scor e > 7 at 1 minute and >  8 at 
5 minutes who required phototherapy for jaundice were included. Babies with haemolysis, 
G6PD deficiency, fever, maternal use of narcotic analgesics during labour or ruptured 
membranes > 18 hours were excluded. The mean gestational age was 39.1 ± 1.5 weeks and 
the mean birthweight was 3116 ± 392 g. The mean age at entry to study was 53 ± 31 hours and 
the mean serum bilirubin was 238 ± 43 micromol/litre. Sixteen participants (53 %) were male. 
While there were no statistically significant changes in heart rate during phototherapy, 
significant changes in heart-rate variability were observed. M ean SD1 measurements before and 
during phototherapy were 12 ± 8 ms and 8 ± 4 ms, respectively ( P < 0.02); mean SD2 
measurements were 33  ± 16 ms and 22 ± 10 ms, respectively ( P < 0.01);  mean SDDN 
measurements were 30  ± 14 ms and 18 ± 7 ms, respectively ( P < 0.01), and mean RMSSD 
measurements were 18 ± 12 ms and 11 ± 6 ms, respectively (P < 0.02). [EL 3] 
Vasodilator effects 
An RCT183 carried out in Turkey compared close phototherapy (15 cm above the baby) and remote 
phototherapy (30–45 cm above the baby) in 61 term and 37 preterm babies. The mean gestational 
age of the term babies was 38.7 ± 1.2 weeks and the mean birthweight was 3361 ± 449 g while 
for preterm babies the mean gestational age and mean birthweight were 33.5 ± 2.8 weeks and 

Treatment 
125 
2088 ± 604 g, respectively. No statistically significant differences were found in body temperature, 
heart rate and blood pressure, serum nitric oxide (NO) levels, or vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) levels in babies receiving close or distant phototherapy. [EL 1−] 
Patent ductus arteriosus 
An RCT184 from the USA evaluated the use of foil shields placed over the chest of preterm babies 
(n = 74) receiving phototherapy to prevent patent ductus arteriosus. The mean gestational age of the 
population was 29.3 weeks and the mean birthweight was  1035 g. The mean duration of 
phototherapy was 8.3 days for the shield group and 8.5 days for the no shield group. Use of the foil 
shield was associated with a statistically significantly lower frequency of patent ductus arteriosus 
(P < 0.009) but with a non- statistically significant trend to increased later mortality (up to 
167 days), with ten versus four deaths (P = 0.056). The majority of deaths were due to complication 
of preterm birth or sepsis and were not related to the course of therapy in the first 4 weeks. [EL 1+] 
Evidence summary 
Studies of mixed quality reported that TEWL increased significantly (by up to 25%) in babies 
receiving conventional phototherapy. An RCT [EL 1−] of close and distant phototherapy found no 
statistically significant differences in clinical variables, including body temperature, heart rate and 
blood pressure, during phototherapy. Three studies, one EL  1+ and two EL  2−, examined the 
association between history of exposure to phototherapy and later naevus acquisition in primary-
school children. No statistically significant association was identified. One small study reported a 
statistically significant link after stratification for risk factors. One study reported that phototherapy 
was associated with DNA damage. However , there is no evidence t hat this effect on DNA at a 
microscopic level can lead to long-term adverse effects in phototherapy-treated babies. 
GDG translation from evidence 
Good clinical practice should ensure that babies are kept hydrated while undergoing phototherapy. 
Hydration can be assessed by changes in body weight, and observation of wet and dirty nappies. 
The evidence suggests that neither fluorescent nor LED lights contribute significantly to increased 
TEWL, whereas halogen lights do increase such water losses. Conventional phototherapy should be 
interrupted to facilitate breastfeeding, and mothers should be offered lactation support. 
Breastfeeding mothers should be taught how to express their milk if their baby needs additional 
fluids, and encouraged to express frequently if their baby requires continuous phototherapy. 
When multiple phototherapy is required, phototherapy should be continuous. Most babies 
requiring continuous phototherapy can continue to receive milk feeds. Long -term concerns 
about adverse effects of phototherapy, serve as a reminder that phototherapy is a powerful tool 
and should not be used without specific indications. 
No evidence was found to suggest that preterm babies or other vulnerable groups of babies are 
at increased risk of adverse effects from phototherapy. 
 
Recommendations – 7.2.3 Feeding and hydration during phototherapy 
During conventional ‘blue light’ phototherapy: 
• using clinical judgement, encourage short breaks (of up to 30 minutes) for breastfeeding, 
nappy changing and cuddles 
• continue lactation/feeding support  
• do not give additional fluids or feeds routinely. 
Maternal expressed milk is the additional feed of choice if available, and when additional 
feeds are indicated 
During multiple phototherapy: 
• do not interrupt phototherapy for feeding but continue administering intravenous/enteral feeds 
• continue lactation/feeding support so that breastfeeding can start again when treatment stops. 
Maternal expressed milk is the additional feed of choice if available, and when additional 
feeds are indicated 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
126 
7.2.4 Additional equipment 
White curtains 
Description of included studies 
Three RCT s190-192 ( n = 285) were eligible for this comparison. One study  apiece was from 
Germany,191 India192 and Malaysia.190 One study190 was rated EL 1+ as block randomisation was 
used and investigators were blind to the allocation, the second 192 was rated EL 1+ as sealed 
opaque envelopes were used as allocation concealment while the third study 191 did not report 
on either the randomisation method or the allocation concealment and so was rated EL  1−. In 
one study 190 the four outer walls of the incubator were draped in white cloth while in the 
other191;192 two a white cloth was hung from both sides of the phototherapy unit. 
The mean gestational  age of study participants was reported in one study as 37.5 ± 1.3 weeks 
and in another the median age was 40 weeks. Mean birthweight was reported in one study as  
2856 ± 345 g and not reported in the other two studies. The mean age at entry to study was 
69 ± 36 hours and 105 ± 35 hours in two studies and was not reported in the third study . The 
mean serum bilirubin ranged from 243 ± 28 micromol/litre to 280 ± 39 micromol/litre. In all, 
165 participants (58.3%) were male. 
Review findings 
As different time -points (4 hours and 24 hours) were used to measure the primary outcome of 
change in serum bilirubin concentration, it was not appropriate to combine the results. 
However, all studies showed a statistically significantly greater decrease in serum bilirubin at 
the different time-points for babies in the curtained groups. At 4 hours the mean difference was  
−24.00 micromol/litre ( 95% CI −33.75 to −14.25 micromol/litre) and at 24 hours the mean 
difference was −20.36 micromol/litre (95% CI −31.52 to −9.19 micromol/litre) (Figure 7.18). 
Figure 7.18  Mean change in serum bilirubin  when whi te curtains are used compared with  not 
using white curtains 
One study reported that white curtains made no statistically significant difference to the mean 
duration of phototherapy .192 Another study, using Cox proportional hazards regression analysi s, 
reported that the median duration of phototherapy was statistically significantly shorter 
(22 hours) in the phototherapy with curtains group compared with the control.190 
Evidence summary 
Three studies reported that using white curtains on the side of the incubator or draped from the 
overhead unit led to a greater decrease in serum bilirubin levels at both 4 and 24 hours. One 
study reported a significant decrease in the duration of phototherapy when white curtain were 
used while a second study reported no difference in duration of phototherapy.  
Study or Subgroup
8.1.1 4 hours
F - Djokomuljanto 2006
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Not applicable
Test for overall effect: Z = 4.82 (P < 0.00001)
8.1.2 24 hours
F - Eggert 1988
F - Sivandan 2009
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 1.72, df = 1 (P = 0.19); I² = 42%
Test for overall effect: Z = 3.57 (P = 0.0004)
Test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.23, df = 1 (P = 0.63), I² = 0%
Mean
-28
-80
-39
SD
25
27
56
Total
50
50
36
42
78
Mean
-4
-56
-34
SD
24
26
63
Total
47
47
34
42
76
Weight
100.0%
100.0%
80.8%
19.2%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-24.00 [-33.75, -14.25]
-24.00 [-33.75, -14.25]
-24.00 [-36.42, -11.58]
-5.00 [-30.49, 20.49]
-20.36 [-31.52, -9.19]
PT with curtains Pt Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Pt with curtains Favours Pt

Treatment 
127 
GDG translation from evidence 
The GDG accepts that the use of white curtains as an adjunct to phototherapy can aid serum 
bilirubin reduction but, because their use compromises the ability to observe the baby, the 
GDG does not recommend their use. 
Using incubators or bassinets 
Description of included studies 
No studies were identified. 
Review findings 
No studies were identified. 
Evidence summary 
No evidence was identified. 
GDG translation from evidence 
As no evidence was identified, the GDG cannot recommend the use of incubators or bassinets  
for the treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia and considers that clinical considerations and 
availability should determine whether either of these are used to nurse babies who require 
phototherapy. Babies should be nursed in a thermo- neutral environment, in other words , in 
surroundings of an ambient temperature that minimises their energy expenditure on keeping 
warm or cool.  
 
Recommendations – 7.2.4 Additional equipment 
Use incubators or bassinets according to clinical need and availability.  
Do not use white curtains routinely with phototherapy as they may impair observation of the 
baby. 
7.3 Exchange transfusion 
Clinical question 
i) How effective is exchange transfusion? 
ii) What is the best method (single-volume versus double-volume exchange)? 
iii) What are the criteria/indications for carrying out an exchange transfusion?  
Description of included studies 
Following electronic searches, 103 records were identified and 17 hard- copy articles were 
requested. Following expert advice, five more hard- copy articles were ordered  so a total of 22 
studies were included. Initially , only RCTs were  to be included but, due to the paucity of data 
on adverse effects reported in these studies , the scope was expanded to include lower quality 
studies that reported adverse effects. 
Review findings 
Double-volume exchange transfusion 
In six RCTs ,193-199 double-volume exchange transfusion (DVET) was compared with alternative 
treatment strategies. Exchange transfusion was generally performed using the umbilical vein and acid 
citrate dextrose (ACD) or citrate phosphate dextrose (CPD) blood le ss than 2 or 5 days old. The 
volume of blood used was 75 –170 ml/kg body weight. Exchange transfusions were initiated at 
varying serum bilirubin levels, the lowest being 256.5 micromol/litre in preterm babies and 
307.8 micromol/litre in term babies. In one RCT194;195 reported in two articles, exchange transfusions 
were carried out within 9 hours of birth in babies with haemolytic disease of the newborn. 

Neonatal jaundice 
128 
DVET versus no treatment 
The first RCT193 carried out in the USA compared exchange transfusion with no treatment in 100 
babies with indirect serum bilirubin > 3 07.8 micromol/litre. Babies were less than 1 week old. 
Demographic details and method of randomisation were not reported al though sealed 
envelopes were used to conceal allocation to intervention groups. There were three deaths in 
each group, none attributable to exchange transfusion. One baby in the control group had 
kernicterus confirmed by autopsy. Seven of the exchange transfusion group had an abnormal 
neurological examination at 12–24 months compared with six in the control group. [EL 1+] 
DVET versus simple transfusion 
This RCT 194;195 compared exchange transfusion with simple top- up transfusion in 137 babies 
with haemolytic disease of the newborn. All transfusions were carried out within 9 hours of 
birth. Sample demographics and method of randomisation were not reported although sealed 
envelopes were used to conceal allocation to intervention groups. There were statistically 
significantly fewer deaths in the exchange transfusion group (RR  0.26, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.60) and 
also statistically significantly fewer cases of kernicterus (RR 0.38, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.87). [EL 1+] 
DVET versus single-volume exchange transfusion 
This RCT, 196 carried out in Switzerland, compared DVET with sin gle-volume exchange 
transfusion (S VET) in the management of ABO haemolytic disease. Twenty babies were 
included, of whom 15 (75%) were male. The mean gestational age of the sample was 
39.5 ± 1.0 weeks, the mean birthweight was 3305 ± 392 g, the mean age at  entry to study was 
17.9 ± 6.1 hours, and the mean serum bilirubin was 207 ± 45 micromol/litre. A random 
numbers table was used to allocate babies to the groups but allocation concealment was not 
reported. Both interventions were initiated according to the  modified Polacek curve as 
described by Cockington. 200 There was no statistically significant difference between SVET and 
DVET in mean reduction of serum bilirubin, mean duration of adjunctive phototherapy and 
level of rebound hyperbilirubinaemia. There were no cases of kernicterus or reported adverse 
effects in either group. [EL 1−] 
Exchange transfusion versus phototherapy 
An RCT,197 carried out in Singapore, compared DVET with phototherapy for the manageme nt of 
non-haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia. In all, 52 babies were included , of whom 28 (54%) were 
male. The mean gestational age of the sample was 37.0  ± 2.78 weeks, the mean birthweight 
was 2501  ± 576 g, the mean age at entry to study was 84 ± 12 hours, and the mean serum 
bilirubin was 297 ± 25 micromol/litre. Both interventions were initiated at serum bilirubin 
> 256.5 micromol/litre in preterm babies and > 3 07.8 micromol/litre in term babies. Neither 
the method of randomisation nor  allocation concealment was reported but there were no 
significant differences between the groups on any baseline variable. There was a statistically 
significantly greater reduction in mean serum bilirubin 24 hours after initiation of treatment in 
the phototherapy group (MD  = 51 micromol/litre, 95% CI 39.7 to 62.3  micromol/litre). In the 
exchange transfusion group there was an initial fall in serum bilirubin levels at 6 hours but this 
was rapidly followed by rebound hyperbilirubinaemia. There were more treatment failures in 
the exchange transfusion group, with eight  babies requiring repeat exchange transfusion, while 
no babies in the phototherapy group required additional treatment. The RR of treatment failure 
in the exchange transfusion group was statistically significant, althoug h confidence intervals 
were wide, at 17.00 (95%  CI 1.03 to 280.07). There were no cases of kernicterus in either 
group. [EL 1−] 
Alternative methods for DVET 
The fifth RCT, 198 carried out in Canada, compared conventional DVET with albumin- enriched 
DVET. A total of 42 babies were included, of whom 25 (60%) were male, and 27 (64%) had 
Rhesus or ABO incompatibility. The mean gestational age of the sample was 36.0 ± 0.7 weeks, 
the mean birthweight was 2455 ± 153 g, and the mean serum bilirubin was 
263 ± 82 micromol/litre. Neither the method of randomisation nor allocation concealment was 
reported but there were no significant differences between the groups on any baseline variable. 
There was no statistically significant difference between DVET and albumin- enriched DVET in 
mean reduction of serum bilirubin, mean duration of adjunctive phototherapy and the degree of 

Treatment 
129 
rebound hyperbilirubinaemia. There were no cases of kernicterus or reported adverse effects in 
either group. [EL 1−] 
The sixth RCT, 199 carried out in the USA, compared DVET with exchange transfusion with 
frozen erythrocytes diluted in plasma. The sample was divided into low -birthweight (< 2500 g) 
and appropriate-birthweight (> 2500 g) groups, and subjects within each group were randomly 
allocated to either treatment. Neither allocation concealment nor the method of randomisation 
was reported but there were no significant differences between the groups on any baseline 
variable. In the low -birthweight group the mean gestational age of the sample was 
32.6 ± 3.2 weeks, the mean birthweight was 1670 ± 434 g, and the mean serum bilirubin was 
304 ± 48 micromol/litre, while in the appropriate -birthweight group the mean gestational age of 
the sample was 39.1 ± 1.8 weeks, the mean birthweight was 3234 ± 494 g, and the mean serum 
bilirubin was 328 ± 25 micromol/litre There was no statistically significant  difference between 
DVET and frozen erythrocytes in mean reduction of serum bilirubin or in the number of 
treatment failures or deaths. There were no cases of kernicterus or reported adverse effects in 
either group. [EL 1−] 
Side effects of DVET 
A non- randomised controlled study from India 201 examined the role of calcium in exchange 
transfusion by alternately allocating subjects to either DVET or to DVET with 1 ml of 10% 
calcium gluconate intravenously  for every 100 ml of CPD blood exchanged. Sample 
demographics w ere not reported. No jaundice -related outcome data were presented but one 
baby who received calcium had a cardiac arrest. The authors concluded that the administration 
of calcium had no role in exchange transfusion. [EL 1−] 
A study from India ,202 using historical controls, compared exchange transfusion through 
peripheral vessels, either brachial or radial artery, with exchange via the umbilical vein. Of 198 
babies who underwent exchange transfusion, 90 were exchanged through peripheral vessels, 
using the brachial or radial artery on one side and a good peripheral or antecubital vein on the 
other side. No major complications were observed, although two babies who received 
exchange transfusions through the radial artery suffered from transient blanching of the hand. 
The perceiv ed advantage of peripheral exchange transfusions was that feeding could be 
continued while the procedure was taking place. [EL 3] 
Another retrospective chart review from the USA 203 examined the adverse effects of exchange 
transfusion over a 10- year period. Babies < 30 days old who had received at least one 
exchange transfusion for hyperbilirubinaemia were included. In all, 55 babies underwent a total 
of 66 exchange transfusions. The mean gestational age of the sample was 35 ± 4 weeks and the 
mean birthweight was 2388  ± 973 g. Thirty (55%) of the sample were male. The mean serum 
bilirubin was 307.8 ± 136.8 micromol/litre. An adverse event was attributed if it occurred within 
7 days of exchange transfusion. One baby died and another suffered seizures. The most 
common adverse effects were thrombocytopenia (22 babies), hypocalcaemia (1 9), catheter  
malfunction (six), hypotension (five ), venous thrombosis (two ), hypokalaemia (two ) and 
hypoglycaemia ( two). One baby each suffered from bradycardia, acute renal failure and 
omphalitis. [EL 3] 
A third retrospective chart review in the USA 204 reported the adverse effects of exchange 
transfusion over a 15-year period. The sample (n = 106) was divided into two groups, those with 
hyperbilirubinaemia (n  = 81) and those with co- morbid medical problems (n  = 25). The mean 
gestational age was 36.6 ± 3.6 weeks and the mean body weight was 2846 ± 806 g. The 106 
babies included had a total of 140 exchange transfusions. Repeat exchange transfusions were 
more commonly needed among those with co- morbid medical problems. Three babies died of 
causes probably attributable to exchange transfusion, while four suffered permanent serious 
sequelae (defined as serious complications that resulted in permanent bodily alterations) and 
four suffered serious prolonged complications (defined as symptomatic patients with serious 
problems whose problems eventually resolved). The most common adverse effects were related 
to hypocalcaemia (one  death and 26 requiring treatment) and thrombocytopenia ( two deaths 
and 15 requiring treatment). Twelve babies experienced catheter malfunctions (due to clotting) 
requiring a replacement catheter and/or discontinuation of treatment. [EL 3] 

Neonatal jaundice 
130 
The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHHD) study in the USA 129 
which compared phototherapy with no treatment, used exchange transfusion as an outcome. The 
morbidity and mortality associated with exchange transfusions was also examined in the 190 
subjects who received 331 exchange transfusions. The serum bilirubin levels at which exchange 
transfusions were indicated ranged from 171 micromol/litre for high-risk low-birthweight babies to 
342 micromol/litre for babies with birthweight > 2500 g. The mean reduction in serum bilirubin 
was 139 ± 30 micromol/litre. Adverse effects related to exchange transfusions were transient 
bradycardia in eight  babies (4.2%) – six after receiving calcium – transient cyanosis in three  
(1.6%), transient vasospasm in two (1.0%), vasospasm with thrombosis in two (1.0%) and apnoea 
and/or bradycardia requiring treatment in seven babies (3.7%). Three babies died within 24 hours 
(one within 6 hours) of exchange transfusion. [EL 1++] 
Evidence summary  
Most of the included RCTs were of poor quality, had small sample sizes and were conducted 
more than 30 years ago. In one trial with EL 1−, no difference was observed in the mortality or 
incidence of kernicterus between babies given DVET and those not given any treatment, 
although this study did not specify the demographic characteristics or the criteria for diagnosing 
kernicterus. Results  from the second trial with EL  1+ suggest that, compared with simple 
transfusion, DVET leads to fewer deaths and less kernicterus in the treatment of haemolytic 
disease of the newborn. Another trial with EL 1− compared phototherapy with DVET for the 
treatment of non- haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia and showed better results with phototherapy. 
However, DVET was carried out as a single procedure and was not followed by phototherapy, 
as is the current clinical practice. The other trials showed no statistically significant differences 
between DVET and SVET, albumin- enriched exchange transfusions or transfusion using frozen 
erythrocytes diluted in plasma for the treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia.  
Evidence on the adverse effects of exchange transfusions was collated from non- comparative 
studies. The most common adverse effects were thrombocytop enia, hypocalcaemia, catheter 
malfunction, hypotension, venous thrombosis, hypokalaemia and hypoglycaemia.  
GDG translation from evidence  
The GDG considered the potential adverse side effects of DVET when carried out by 
experienced healthcare professionals and concluded that this procedure is relatively safe and 
effective for babies at risk of kernicterus from severe hyperbilirubinaemia. 
The GDG noted that a single study reported no difference between SVET  and DVET but 
considered this single study to be insufficient evidence to change current clinical practice. The 
clinical rationale for using double volume rather single volume is to reduce the likelihood of 
needing repeat transfusion. 
No added benefit was found for albumin priming or for giving calcium with the exchange 
transfusion, so the GDG considered that in the absence of evidence to support these practice s 
they should not be recommended. 
Blood used for exchange transfusions should comply with the current guidance from the British 
Committee for Standards in Haematology (www.bcshguidelines.com). The GDG noted that babies 
whose parents object to the use of blood transfusions for religious or cultural reasons should be 
treated with the same standard of care as all babies, with the best interests of the child paramount. 
Local procedures should be in place to support communication with parents in this situation. 
As stated in Section 3.2, acute bilirubin encephalopathy is a risk factor for kernicterus, and as such 
the GDG concluded that there is no reason to change current clinical practice, which is to perform 
an exchange transfusion in babies with signs of acute bilirubin encephalopathy (w hich include 
opisthotonos and retrocollis). Babies with signs attributable to acute bilirubin encephalopathy 
require exchange transfusion even if their bilirubin levels are controlled by phototherapy. 
As bilirubin levels may not fall and may continue to rise, even after an exchange transfusion, it 
is considered ‘best’ practice to estimate bilirubin levels within 2 hours to assess whether another 
exchange transfusion is needed. 

Treatment 
131 
Recommendations – 7.3 Exchange transfusion 
Use a double-volume exchange transfusion to treat babies: 
• whose serum bilirubin level indicates its necessity (see threshold table (Section 1.3) and 
treatment threshold graphs (Section 1.6)) 
 and/or 
• with clinical features and signs of acute bilirubin encephalopathy. 
During exchange transfusion do not: 
• stop continuous multiple phototherapy 
• perform a single-volume exchange 
• use albumin priming 
• routinely administer intravenous calcium. 
Following exchange transfusion:  
• maintain continuous multiple phototherapy  
• measure serum bilirubin level within 2 hours and manage according to threshold table 
(Section 1.3) and treatment thresholds graphs (Section 1.6). 
7.4 Other treatments 
Clinical questions 
What are the other ways of treating hyperbilirubinaemia? Are they effective? 
What is the effectiveness of the following interventions in treating neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia/preventing kernicterus? 
– metalloporphyrins 
– gammaglobulins 
– drugs (phenobarbitol, clofibrate, cholestyramine) 
– agar, charcoal 
– suppositories, other rectal modes of treatment 
– complementary/alternative medicines (Chinese herbal remedies such as Yin-chen) 
Following electronic searches, which were restricted to controlled trials and reviews, 167 
records were identified and 22 hard-copy articles were requested. These were supplemented by 
relevant articles identified by earlier searches for the phototherapy review. A total of 61 hard-
copy articles were obtained. For some interventions, no RCTs were identified so other study 
types were used in these analyses. 
7.4.1 Intravenous immunoglobulin 
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) acts by preventing the destruction of sensitised erythrocytes. 
IVIG contains pooled IgG immunoglobulins extracted from the plasma of over 1000 blood 
donors. The Department of Health has recently updated their guidance on the use of IVIG 
(www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_
085235). 
Description of included studies 
Eleven articles were obtained, including reports of five RCTs 205-209 carried out in Argentina, 205 
Germany,207 Iran, 209 Saudi Arabia 206 and Turkey 208 comparing IVIG in combination with 
phototherapy with phototherapy alone for the treatment of haemolytic jaundice. Six articles 
were excluded for the following reasons: not randomised (two studies), compared different 
dosages of IVIG (one), examined IVIG as prophylaxis to prevent the need for phototherapy 
(one), non-English language (one) and conference abstract (one). 
One study208 reported using random numbers to allocat e the babies into the treatment groups 
and using sealed envelopes to conceal the treatment allocation and so was rated EL 1++. None 
of the other studies reported the method of ra ndomisation or allocation concealment and so 

Neonatal jaundice 
132 
were rated EL 1−. IVIG was administered as a single dose (500 mg/kg body weight) over 
2 hours in one study,207 as a single dose (500 mg/kg body weight) over 4 hours in the second, 206 
as a single dose (500 mg/kg body weight) as s oon as possible after birth in the third study, 208 as 
three doses (500 mg/kg body weight each) over  4 hours every 12 hours in the fourth study, 209 
and as 800 mg/kg body weight per day for 3 days in the final study.205 
Two studies205;208 included both term and preterm babies while the other three 206;207;209 included 
only term babies. Three of the studies 205;207;208 included only babies with Rhesus haemolytic 
disease, one 206 included only babies with ABO haemolytic disease and the fifth 209 included 
babies with either Rhesus or ABO haemolytic disease and presented the results for both groups. 
The mean birthweight ranged from 2683  ± 292 g to 2834 ± 569 g in four studies205;206;208;209 and 
was not reported in the other study. 207 The mean age at entry to study was 20.2  ± 9.5 hours in 
the one study209 that reported this. The mean serum bilirubin was 254 ± 57 micromol/litre in the 
one study 209 that reported this. The mean gestational age ranged from 36.1  ± 2 weeks to 
38 weeks in three studies 205;206;208 and another 209 included only term babies. In the three 
studies206;208;209 that reported on gender, 109 participants (58.3%) were male. 
Review findings 
Dichotomous outcomes 
Indications for exchange transfusion in the studies included serum bilirubin 
≥ 340 micromol/litre (two studies), serum bilirubin ≥ 307.8 micromol/litre in babies over 
2000 g, serum bilirubin above the Polacek criteria, 210;211 and serum bilirubin rising by 8.5 or 
17.1 micromol/litre per hour. Babies randomised  to receive IVIG needed statistically 
significantly fewer exchange transfusions than controls (RR 0.31, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.47) 
(Figure 7.19). Heterogeneity was not significant at I² = 37%. 
Figure 7.19  Number of exchange transfusions needed when IVIG combined with phototherapy is 
compared with phototherapy alone 
A post hoc sensitivity analysis examined the effect of IVIG in Rhesus haemolytic disease and 
ABO haemolytic disease. 
The RR was similar in both Rhesus and ABO haemolytic disease: RR 0.33 (95% CI 0.20 to 0.52) 
and RR 0.29 (95% CI 0.13 to 0.68), respectively (Figure 7.20). However, the number needed to 
treat (NNT) with IVIG to prevent one exchange transfusion differed in each category of haemolytic 
disease. For Rhesus disease the NNT was two while in ABO disease the NNT was five. 
The included studies did not report on the adverse effect profile of IVIG. 
Continuous outcomes 
Only three studies 205;206;209 reported the duration of adjunctive phototherapy. This was 
statistically significantly shorter in babies receiving IVIG (MD  = −16.46 hours, 95% CI −26.13 
to −6.79 hours) (Figure 7.21). Heterogeneity was not a significant factor at I² = 27%. 
See the end of Section 7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
 
Study or Subgroup
1.6.1 IVIG
F - Dagoglu 1995
F - Miqdad 2004
F - Nasseri 2006
F - Rubo 1992
M - Voto 1995
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 6.33, df = 4 (P = 0.18); I² = 37%
Test for overall effect: Z = 5.57 (P < 0.00001)
Events
4
4
3
2
8
21
Total
22
56
17
16
19
130
Events
15
16
11
11
12
65
Total
19
56
17
16
18
126
Weight
24.2%
24.1%
16.6%
16.6%
18.6%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.23 [0.09, 0.58]
0.25 [0.09, 0.70]
0.27 [0.09, 0.81]
0.18 [0.05, 0.69]
0.63 [0.34, 1.17]
0.31 [0.20, 0.47]
IVIG Control Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours IVIG Favours control

Treatment 
133 
Figure 7.20 Number of exchange transfusions needed when IVIG combined with phototherapy is 
compared with phototherapy alone – sensitivity analysis based on ABO or Rh haemolysis 
Figure 7.21 Mean duration of phototherapy  when IVIG combined with phototherapy is compared 
with phototherapy alone 
7.4.2 Other therapies 
Clofibrate 
Clofibrate is a fibric acid derivative that acts as a lipid- regulating drug. In neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia its presumed mode of action is by increasing bilirubin conjugation and 
excretion. 
Description of included studies 
From the six articles obtained, one was excluded as the trial was not randomised. Five RCT s 
carried out in Iran 212-216 examined clofibrate combined with phototherapy against phototherapy 
alone for the treatment of non- haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia. The evidence level of the 
included studies ranged from EL  1− to EL  1++. Three  studies212-214 reported using random 
numbers tables as the method of randomisation. 
In four studies213-216 clofibrate was administered in a single oral dose of 100 mg/kg body weight 
while in the fifth study 212 it was given in either a low dose of 25 mg/kg body weight or a 
moderate dose of 50 mg/kg body weight. This study reported results after the first 24 hours of 
treatment w hile the other RCTs reported up to 96 hours of treatment. This study 212 was 
subjected to a sensitivity analysis to ascertain the robustness of the results in terms of 
dose/duration of study. 
All the studies were carried out in term babies. Where reported, the mean gestational age 
ranged from 38.7 ± 0.9 weeks to 38.8 ± 1.6 weeks, the mean birthweight ranged from 
2542 ± 547 g to 3259 ± 481 g, the mean age at entry to study ranged from 123 ± 55 hours to 
216 ± 94.8 hours, the mean serum bilirubin ranged from 301 ± 23.4 micromol/litre to 
395 ± 58 micromol/litre, and 145 (53.7%) of the sample were male. 
Study or Subgroup
1.6.1 Rh
F - Dagoglu 1995
F - Nasseri 2006
F - Rubo 1992
M - Voto 1995
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 5.91, df = 3 (P = 0.12); I² = 49%
Test for overall effect: Z = 4.77 (P < 0.00001)
1.6.2 ABO
F - Miqdad 2004
F - Nasseri 2006
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 0.44, df = 1 (P = 0.51); I² = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 2.85 (P = 0.004)
Events
4
1
2
8
15
4
2
6
Total
22
6
16
19
63
56
11
67
Events
15
7
11
12
45
16
4
20
Total
19
7
16
18
60
56
10
66
Weight
34.7%
15.1%
23.7%
26.5%
100.0%
79.2%
20.8%
100.0%
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.23 [0.09, 0.58]
0.23 [0.05, 0.95]
0.18 [0.05, 0.69]
0.63 [0.34, 1.17]
0.33 [0.20, 0.52]
0.25 [0.09, 0.70]
0.45 [0.10, 1.97]
0.29 [0.13, 0.68]
IVIG Control Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
M-H, Fixed, 95% CI
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours IVIG Favours control
Study or Subgroup
1.4.7 IVIG
F - Miqdad 2004
F - Nasseri 2006
M - Voto 1995
Subtotal (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 2.75, df = 2 (P = 0.25); I² = 27%
Test for overall effect: Z = 3.34 (P = 0.0008)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
Mean
92
119
144
SD
29
23
72
Total
56
17
19
92
Mean
106
154
144
SD
29
48
72
Total
56
17
18
91
Weight
81.1%
14.6%
4.3%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-14.00 [-24.74, -3.26]
-35.00 [-60.30, -9.70]
0.00 [-46.42, 46.42]
-16.46 [-26.13, -6.79]
IVIG Control Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours IVIG Favours Control

Neonatal jaundice 
134 
Review findings 
Dichotomous outcomes 
None of the studies reported on either the number of exchange transfusions needed or the 
adverse effect profile of clofibrate. 
Continuous outcomes 
All five studies (n  = 310) contributed to the analysis on the mean decrease in serum bilirubin. 
There was a statistically significantly greater decrease in serum bilirubin among those treated 
with clofibrate  (MD = −63.62 micromol/litre, 95% CI −68.59 to −58.66 micromol/litre) 
(Figure 7.22). Heterogeneity was very high at I² = 95%. 
Figure 7.22  Mean decrease in serum bilirubin when clofibrate combined with phototherapy is 
compared with phototherapy alone 
The post hoc  sensitivity analysis excluding the low/moderate dose study showed a n MD of  
−36.60 micromol/litre (95% CI −44.40 to −28.80 micromol/litre) and heterogeneity was non-
existent at I² = 0% (Figure 7.23). 
Figure 7.23 Mean decrease in serum bilirubin when clof ibrate combined with phototherapy is 
compared with phototherapy alone – sensitivity analysis based on dosage used 
Three studies212-214 (n = 210) contributed data on duration of phototherapy . Babies who received 
clofibrate required a statistically significantly shorter time under phototherapy 
(MD = −9.58 hours, 95%  CI −11.14 to −8.02 hours) (Figure 7.24). There was a high level of 
heterogeneity at I² = 86%. 
Figure 7.24  Mean duration of phototherapy  when clofibrate combined with phototherapy is 
compared with phototherapy alone 
The post hoc sensitivity analysis excluding the low/moderate dose study showed a n MD of  
−20.22 hours (95% CI −26.39 to −14.06 hours) with I² still relatively high at 48% (Figure 7.25). 
Study or Subgroup
F - Ashkan 2007
F - Eghbalian 2007
F - Mohammadzadeh 2005
F - Zahedpasha 2007
F - Zahedpasha 2008
Total (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 78.96, df = 4 (P < 0.00001); I² = 95%
Test for overall effect: Z = 25.13 (P < 0.00001)
Mean
-186
-171
-210
-148
-142
SD
14
30
37
20
26
Total
60
30
30
30
21
171
Mean
-104
-137
-184
-108
-104
SD
15
45
44
24
29
Total
30
30
30
30
19
139
Weight
59.5%
6.6%
5.8%
19.7%
8.4%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-82.00 [-88.43, -75.57]
-34.00 [-53.35, -14.65]
-26.00 [-46.57, -5.43]
-40.00 [-51.18, -28.82]
-38.00 [-55.14, -20.86]
-63.62 [-68.59, -58.66]
Clofibrate Control Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Clofibrate Favours Control
Study or Subgroup
F - Eghbalian 2007
F - Mohammadzadeh 2005
F - Zahedpasha 2007
F - Zahedpasha 2008
Total (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 1.47, df = 3 (P = 0.69); I² = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 9.20 (P < 0.00001)
Mean
-171
-210
-148
-142
SD
30
37
20
26
Total
30
30
30
21
111
Mean
-137
-184
-108
-104
SD
45
44
24
29
Total
30
30
30
19
109
Weight
16.2%
14.4%
48.7%
20.7%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-34.00 [-53.35, -14.65]
-26.00 [-46.57, -5.43]
-40.00 [-51.18, -28.82]
-38.00 [-55.14, -20.86]
-36.60 [-44.40, -28.80]
Clofibrate Control Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Clofibrate Favours Control
Study or Subgroup
F - Ashkan 2007
F - Eghbalian 2007
F - Mohammadzadeh 2005
Total (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 14.16, df = 2 (P = 0.0008); I² = 86%
Test for overall effect: Z = 12.03 (P < 0.00001)
Mean
14.45
53.6
30
SD
1.4
15
12.9
Total
60
30
30
120
Mean
23.3
68.8
54
SD
4.4
21.6
18.8
Total
30
30
30
90
Weight
93.6%
2.8%
3.7%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-8.85 [-10.46, -7.24]
-15.20 [-24.61, -5.79]
-24.00 [-32.16, -15.84]
-9.58 [-11.14, -8.02]
Clofibrate Control Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Clofibrate Favours Control

Treatment 
135 
Figure 7.25 Mean duration of phototherapy  when clofibrate combined with phototherapy is 
compared with phototherapy alone – sensitivity analysis based on dosage 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Riboflavin 
Description of included studies 
From the four articles obtained, one was excluded as the study reported was not randomised. 
Three RCT s217-219 from Hungary ,218 Turkey219 and the USA 217 compared riboflavin in 
combination with phototherapy with phototherapy alone for the treatment of 
hyperbilirubinaemia. One study 217 used random numbers to allocate treatment but did not 
report on allocation concealment and so was rated EL 1+. Neither of the other two studies 218;219 
reported either randomisation method or allocation concealment and so were rated EL 1−. 
Where reported, the mean birthweight ranged from 3230 ± 502 g to 3338 ± 425 g, the mean 
age at entry to study ranged from 50.2 ± 27.2 hours to 71.3 ± 24.1 hours, and the mean serum 
bilirubin was 358 ± 71 micromol/litre. In one study 217 that reported gender, 12 participants 
(50%) were male. The mean gestational age was not reported. 
Review findings 
Dichotomous outcomes 
None of the studies reported on either the number of exchange transfusions needed or the 
adverse effect profile of riboflavin. 
Continuous outcomes 
In one RCT 217 ( n = 24) from the USA, riboflavin (sodium phosphate 1.5 mg/kg body weight  
every 12 hours) was given for 6 hours prior to phototherapy for the treatment of non-haemolytic 
hyperbilirubinaemia in term babies. Riboflavin was discontinued after 24 hours of 
phototherapy. In babies randomised to riboflavin there was a mean reduction (not statistically 
significant) in serum bilirubin after 24 hours (MD  = −17.00 micromol/litre, 95% CI −35.81 to 
1.81 micromol/litre). [EL 1+] 
In the second RCT 219 ( n = 124), from Turkey, riboflavin was given as a single oral dose of 
3 mg/kg body weight within 30 minutes of starting phototherapy in the treatment of term babies 
with non- haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia. Babies receiving riboflavin showed a statistically 
significant reduction in mean serum bilirubin after 24 hours (MD  = −30.00 micromol/litre, 
95% CI −49.20 to −10.80 micromol/litre). There was no statistically significant difference 
regarding mean duration of phototherapy. [EL 1−] 
The third RCT 218 (n = 28), from Hungary, evaluated riboflavin given as an intravenous dose of 
10 mg/kg body weight for the treatment of haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia in term babies being 
prepared for exchange transfusion. Bilirubin concentrations fell in the riboflavin group and rose 
in the control group, resulting in a statistically significantly greater difference between the 
groups in serum bilirubin after 3 hours (MD  = −119.00 micromol/litre, 95% CI −154.62 to 
−83.38 micromol/litre). [EL 1−]. 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Study or Subgroup
F - Eghbalian 2007
F - Mohammadzadeh 2005
Total (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: Chi² = 1.92, df = 1 (P = 0.17); I² = 48%
Test for overall effect: Z = 6.43 (P < 0.00001)
Mean
53.6
30
SD
15
12.9
Total
30
30
60
Mean
68.8
54
SD
21.6
18.8
Total
30
30
60
Weight
42.9%
57.1%
100.0%
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-15.20 [-24.61, -5.79]
-24.00 [-32.16, -15.84]
-20.22 [-26.39, -14.06]
Clofibrate Control Mean Difference Mean Difference
IV, Fixed, 95% CI
-100 -50 0 50 100
Favours Clofibrate Favours Control

Neonatal jaundice 
136 
Metalloporphyrins 
Five articles were obtained and all were excluded as they examined metalloporphyrins as 
prophylaxis for hyperbilirubinaemia. 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Albumin infusions 
Three articles were obtained and two were excluded because one study compared two 
preparations of human serum albumin and the other study was a  non-randomised controlled 
trial. The first study 198 has been included in the section on exchange transfusions. There was no 
statistically significant difference between DVET and albumin- enriched DVET in terms of mean 
reduction of serum bilirubin, the mean duration of adjunctive phototherapy or the level of 
rebound jaundice. There were no cases of kernicterus or reported adverse effects in either 
group. 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Cholestyramine 
Three articles were obtained but no RCTs were identified and one article was a duplicate 
publication. 
Description of included studies 
Two controlled clinical trials 220;221 [EL 2−], from Greece 220 and Singapore ,221 examining 
cholestyramine for the treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia were included. Babies were allocated 
to treatment groups on an alternate basis in both studies and neither study reported on 
allocation concealment. Babies in both studies  received 1.5  g/kg per day of cholestyramine 
powder mixed in milk. 
In the second study ,220 for the preterm  sample (n  = 20) the mean gestational age was 
33.4 ± 0.3 weeks, the mean birthweight was 2077 ± 88 g, the mean age at entry t o study was 
76 ± 2.9 hours, and the mean serum bilirubin was 198 ± 5 micromol/litre. Nine participants 
(45%) were male. Among the term babies  in the two studies, the mean gestational age s were 
38.9 ± 0.2 and 39.1 ± 0.3 weeks, the mean birthweights were 3154 ± 139 and 3286 ± 39 g, the 
mean age s at entry to study were 84 ± 2.9 and 90 ± 1.5 hours, and the mean serum bilirubin 
levels were 298 ± 5 micromol/litre in both studies . Gender  was reported in one study 220 and 
15 participants (37.5%) were male. 
Review findings 
In the first study 221 (conducted in babies  with non- haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia), control 
babies showed a statistically significantly greater reduction in mean serum bilirubin than those 
receiving cholestyramine (MD = 18.00 micromol/litre, 95% CI 8.55 to 27.45 micromol/litre). 
In the second study 220 (conducted in babies with both haemolytic and non- haemolytic 
jaundice), there was a statistically significant reduction in the duration of phototherapy in babies 
treated with cholestyramine. For term babies the MD was  −42.00 hours ( 95% CI −50.98 to 
−34.62 hours) and for preterm  babies the MD was  −26.30 hours ( 95% CI −33.00 to 
−19.60 hours). 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Agar 
A total of 11 articles were obtained. T wo studies,222;223 from Denmark223 and the USA 222, were 
included. These were non- randomised controlled trials  [ EL 2−] that compared phototherapy 
alone with agar combined with phototherapy. 

Treatment 
137 
Description of included studies 
Babies in both studies were allocated to treatment according to their hospital numbers, and thus 
allocation concealment was not possible. 
Agar was given in 250 mg oral doses either every 8 hours during phototherapy or at each 3-
hourly feed. The samples in both studies were comparable, with mean birthweight of 
2767 ± 69 g and 2729 ± 538 g, mean age at entry to study of 80.6 ± 28.7 hours and 
87 ± 26 hours, and mean serum bilirubin of 234 ± 46.8 micromol/litre and 
274 ± 51 micromol/litre. One study 223 reported the mean gestational age of 36.8 ± 2.5 weeks. 
Of the combined sample, 57 participants (56.4%) were male. 
Review findings 
When both studies were pooled in a meta -analysis, t here was no st atistically significant 
difference between treatment and control groups in mean reduction in serum bilirubin 
(MD = −2.00 micromol/litre, 95% CI −24.13 to 20.13 micromol/litre). Also there there was no 
statistically significant difference in the mean duration of phototherapy (MD  = −6.57 hours, 
95% CI −16.06 to 2.92 hours). Heterogeneity was low at I² = 21%. 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Barbiturates 
Eighteen articles were obtained, including one controlled clinical trial from New Zealand 224 
concerning phenobarbitone treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia. Seventeen papers were excluded 
for the following reasons: phototherapy not evaluated concurrently (two studies ), 
phenobarbitone evaluated for prophylaxis, not treatment, of jaundice (12), maternal treatment  
with phenobarbitone evaluated (two) and no jaundice-related outcomes included (one). 
Description of included studies 
In one controlled clinical trial [ EL 2−] the mean gestational age of the sample was 
34.8 ± 2.7 weeks, the mean birthweight was 2155 ± 632 g, the mean age at entry to study was 
48.1 ± 14.7 hours, and the mean serum bilirubin was 174 ± 40 micromol/litre. Forty-nine (49%) 
of the sample were male. Babies who met the criteria for phototherapy were allocated to routine 
care, routine care and phototherapy , or routine care, phototherapy and phenobarbitone. 
Allocation to treatment was on a rotational basis and allocation concealment was not reported. 
Babies with birthweight > 3 000 g received 8  mg of phenobarbitone three times daily while 
those babies with birthweight < 3000 g received 2 mg/kg of phenobarbitone three time daily. 
Review findings 
No baby who received phototherapy alone required an exchange transfusion but one who 
received phenobarbitone combined with phototherapy had an exchange transfusion. This was 
attributed to extensive bruising aggravating hyperbilirubinaemia. Babies who received 
phenobarbitone received phototherapy for longer than control babies (72 ± 31 hours versus 
67 ± 33 hours). 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
D-penicillamine 
Three articles were obtained and all were excluded. Two were historical control studies and one 
was a controlled clinical trial examining D-penicillamine as prophylaxis for hyperbilirubinaemia 
in preterm babies. 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 

Neonatal jaundice 
138 
Glycerin 
Three articles were obtained and all were excluded as they examined glycerin suppositories or 
enemas as prophylaxis for non-haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia. 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Charcoal 
Two articles were obtained and were excluded: one was a non-randomised controlled study and 
the other a historical control study. The controlled clinical trial was aborted when the charcoal 
preparation used was recalled by the Food and Drug Administration following two reports of 
raised serum nickel concentration in adults with erythropoietic rotoporphyria who were treated 
with this preparation. 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Pojark Manna 
One article was obtained and included. 
Description of included studies 
This RCT from Iran 225 compared Pojark Manna combined with phototherapy with phototherapy 
alone. Neither the method of randomisation nor the allocation concealment was reported. The 
study was double -blind. Pojark Manna (’Shirkhest’) is derived from the cotoneaster tricolor 
plant. It has a high sugar content and is used as a laxative. Babies randomised to Pojark Manna 
received 6 g of Shirkhest, and control babies received a starch solution with caramel added so 
as to appear identical to the Shirkhest solution. The mean serum bilirubin in the study was 
401 ± 53 micromol/litre. No other demographic details were provided. 
Review findings 
Phototherapy was discontinued when serum bilirubin fell below 256.5 micromol/litre. The 
mean duration of phototherapy was similar in the treatment and the control groups. [EL 1−] 
See the end of Section  7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation fr om 
evidence. 
Traditional Chinese medicine 
Three articles were obtained : one was excluded as it was a prophylaxis study, and another as it 
was an uncontrolled comparative study. A third study, from Hong Kong ,226 was an in vitro study 
of the effects of Yin- chen (Artemisia scoparia ) on bilirubin in pooled cord serum. Results 
indicated that Yin- chen is effective in displacing bilirubin from circulating albumin, leading to 
increased circulating unbound bilirubin. 
See the end of Sectio n 7.4 for the overall Evidence summary and GDG translation from 
evidence. 
Other interventions 
Only case reports were identified for homeopathy and acupuncture. 
Overall evidence summary for other treatments 
The included RCTs were of varying quality. Important clinical outcomes such as the number of 
exchange transfusions or possible adverse effects of the interventions were often not reported.  
Meta-analysis suggests that a single dose of clofibrate (100 mg/kg body weight) led to 
statistically significant reductions in mean serum bilirubin levels and duration of phototherapy 
compared with phototherapy alone. However , although all the studies were of good quality, 
they were all carried out in one country and may not be generalisable to the UK.  

Treatment 
139 
The use of IVIG in  babies with haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia is accompanied by significant 
reduction in the need for exchange transfusion. This effect is greater in Rhesus haemolytic 
disease (NNT = 2) than in ABO incompatibility (NNT = 5). 
Riboflavin at a dose of 10 mg/kg body weight showed promising results in babies awaiting 
exchange transfusion for haemolytic jaundice. 
There was no evidence to support the use of metalloporphyrins, cholestyramine, albumin 
infusions, agar, barbiturates, D- penicillamine, glycerin, charcoal, Pojark Manna, traditional 
Chinese medicine, homeopathy or acupuncture. 
Cost-effectiveness of other treatments 
The clinical evidence suggests that babies with Rhesus and ABO haemolytic disease receiving 
IVIG are less likely to require exchange transfusion, which is an expensive procedure with 
associated morbidity and mortality . However, IVIG is also a relatively expensive therapeutic 
intervention and there is a shortage of global supply. Therefore an economic evaluation was 
undertaken to help guide GDG recommendations. Full details of this analysis can be found in 
Appendix D. The analysis compared giving IVIG as an adjunct to phototherapy in babies with 
Rhesus haemolytic disease and ABO haemolytic disease where serum bilirubin is continuing to 
rise at more than 8.5 micromol/litre per hour against not giving IVIG to these babies. 
In the base -case analysis, the NNT with IVIG to avoid an exchange transfusion was two  for 
babies with Rhe sus haemolytic disease and five for babies with ABO haemolytic disease. The 
model assumed a mortality rate of 2% for exchange transfusion for the base case but did not 
consider other complications arising from an exchange transfusion or IVIG. This was partly 
to simplify the analysis but also because any impact on quality-adjusted life years ( QALYs) 
would be small relative to the impact from assuming causation between exchange 
transfusion and mortality.  In the base -case analysis , IVIG appears to be a cost- effective 
treatment for Rhe sus haemolytic disease and ABO haemolytic disease, with incremental c ost-
effectiveness ratios of £2,248 per QALY and £11, 944 per QALY , respectively. However, 
there is important uncertainty in the model, in particular in relation to the exact number 
needed to treat with IVIG to avoid an exchange transfusion a nd the mortality attributable to 
exchange transfusion. Therefore, to test the robustness of the base -case cost -effective finding, 
a ‘worst -case’ sensitivity analysis was undertaken. This used the upper 95% confidence 
interval for NNT (three for Rhesus disease and 13 for ABO disease) and a much lower 0.3% 
mortality due to exchange transfusion. For Rhesus haemolytic disease this gave a cost per 
QALY of £34 ,379, which is only just outside the upper bound of what NICE would accept as 
cost-effective treatment. The incremental cost -effectiveness ratio for ABO haemolytic disease 
in this ‘worst -case’ sensitivity analysis was £2 43,381 per QALY. These results suggest that 
IVIG for Rhesus disease is likely to be cost- effective as it remains borderline cost -effective 
even in a ‘worst- case’ scenario. However, the cost- effectiveness of IVIG in ABO disease is 
less clear -cut and further research would be needed to more accurately establish its cost-
effectiveness in this population.  
Overall GDG translation for other treatments 
The evidence supports the current clinical practice of using IVIG alongside phototherapy in babies 
with Rhesus and ABO haemolytic disease. This practice is also in line with recent guidance from 
the Department of Health ( www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/Publications 
PolicyAndGuidance/DH_085235). In these babies, IVIG has been shown to reduce the need for 
exchange t ransfusion, a procedure which has associated morbidity and mortality. The GDG 
agreed that concern over donor over-exposure, potential adverse effects and costs dictate that this 
treatment should be reserved for cases with significant haemolysis evidenced by serum bilirubin 
rising by > 8.5 micromol/litre per hour despi te multiple phototherapy. While  an economic 
analysis suggested that IVIG was cost- effective, some uncertainty remains , especially for babies 
with ABO haemolytic disease because of the higher number needed to treat to avoid an exchange 
transfusion. Therefore, the GDG believe s that further research could better inform cost- effective 
practice. The GDG noted that babies whose parents object to the use of blood products for 
religious or cultural reasons should be treated with the same standard of care as all babies, with 

Neonatal jaundice 
140 
the best interests of the child paramount. Local procedures should be in place to support 
communication with parents in this situation. 
The evidence for effectiveness of clofibrate in  neonatal jaundice is strong but is confined to o ne 
population. The GDG notes that studies of clofibrate in adults reported significant adverse effects.227 
While these findings cannot be directly extrapolated to neonates, this concern, together with the 
paucity of data, led the GDG to conclude that clofibrate cannot currently be recommended for use 
in neonatal jaundice. However, the GDG considered that further investigations in UK populations 
was required and made a research recommendation on this topic. 
No other interventions are recommended for the treatment of hyperbilirubinemia.  
 
Recommendations – 7.4 Other treatments 
Use intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (500 mg/kg over 4 hours) as an adjunct to 
continuous multiple phototherapy in cases of Rhesus haemolytic disease or ABO haemolytic 
disease when the serum bilirubin continues to rise by more than 8.5 micromol/litre per hour. 
Do not use any of the following to treat hyperbilirubinaemia: 
• agar 
• albumin 
• barbiturates 
• charcoal 
• cholestyramine 
• clofibrate 
• D- penicillamine 
• glycerin 
• manna 
• metalloporphyrins 
• riboflavin 
• traditional Chinese medicine 
• acupuncture 
• homeopathy. 
7.5 Satisfaction with treatment 
Description of included studies 
No studies were identified. 
Review findings 
No studies were identified. 
Evidence summary 
No evidence has been identified. 
 

Treatment 
141 
Research recommendations 
What is the effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and safety of Clofibrate alongside phototherapy 
versus phototherapy alone for non-haemolytic significant hyperbilirubinaemia? 
Why this is important. 
Existing research has demonstrated that Clofibrate in combination with phototherapy can 
shorten time spent undergoing phototherapy. This can help minimise the disruption to 
breastfeeding and mother-baby bonding. However no studies have been carried out in a UK 
population. New placebo- controlled double -blind randomis ed controlled trials in a UK 
population are needed. Population: Term and preterm  babies with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 28 days of life. Interventions: Clofibrate (a single 100mg/kg 
dose) combined with phototherapy versus phototherapy with a placebo. Outcome: 
Effectiveness in terms of mean decrease in bilirubin levels and mean duration of phototherapy. 
Extra outcomes should include adverse effects, parental bonding and parental anxiety, staff and 
parental satisfaction with treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009 
What is the clinical and cost -effectiveness of IVIG when used to prevent exchange 
transfusion in newborns with haemolytic disease and rising bilirubin? 
Why this is important. 
Existing research has demonstrated that IVIG is effective in preventing  the need for an 
exchange transfusion in babies with Rhesus haemolysis. New placebo- controlled double -
blind randomised controlled trials are needed to examine if IVIG is effective in sub- groups of 
babies with ABO haemolysis, ie preterm  babies, babies with bilirubin rising greater than 
10 micromol/litre per hour or babies with co- morbid illnesses such as infections. Population: 
Term and preterm  babies with significant hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 28 days of life. 
Interventions: IVIG (500mg/kg over 4 hours) alongside phototherapy versus phototherapy 
alone. Outcome: Number of exchange transfusions needed. Extra outcomes should include 
adverse effects, mean duration of phototherapy, parental anxiety, staff and parental 
satisfaction with treatment and cost effectiveness. Time stamp: Sept 2009  
 

 
142 
8 Information 
Clinical question 
What information and support should be given to parents/carers of babies with neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? 
a) At the time of birth 
b) At the time of recognition of jaundice (FOR ALL BABIES) 
c) At the time of formal assessment/diagnosis 
d) During monitoring 
e) During treatment with phototherapy and other interventions 
f) At discharge and follow-up 
 
Description of included studies 
Two studies228-230 of EL 3 were included. One228 examined barriers to follow-up in the first week 
of life and the other229;230 (reported in two publications) investigated maternal concerns about 
jaundice 
Review findings 
A qualitative study in the USA 228 examined barriers to first -week follow-up for jaundice. Four 
focus groups, one each for physicians and nurses and two for parents, comprising seven to nine  
participants each, were held. Sessions lasted from 90 to 120 minutes and wer e led by an 
experienced facilitator supported by a second observer/facilitator. Participants were asked about 
their experiences, and for possible suggestions for improving this experience. In total , nine 
physicians, eight nurses and 14 parents attended the  focus groups. Tapes of each session were 
transcribed and summarised. Responses were grouped into categories based on themes including 
communication and information, systems and processes of care , and knowledge/education. The 
experiences and solutions relating to information are listed in Table 8.1. 
Table 8.1 Problems and solutions regarding information about jaundice  
Experiences Reported by Solutions Reported by 
Communication gaps during hand-over MD, RN Notify community healthcare 
provider when baby born 
MD, RN 
Missing key information, e.g. birth details, 
lab tests 
MD, RN Provide easy access to lab MD, RN 
  Provide parents with contact 
numbers 
P 
Early discharge limits time for parental 
education 
RN Parental education throughout 
continuum of care 
MD, RN, P 
Reluctance to educate parents prenatally MD, RN Increase physician awareness of 
risks to near-terms 
MD, RN 
Poor understanding of risks to near-terms  MD   
MD = medical doctor; RN = registered nurse; P = parent. 
 
An ethnographic study from the USA 229;230 examined maternal concerns about neonatal 
jaundice. In all, 47 mothers of healthy breastfeeding babies with jaundice were interviewed. 
The mean maternal age was 27 years. Over half of multiparous mothers had had a previous 
baby with jaundice and three -quarters had breastfed a previous baby. Hyperbilirubinaemia was 
defined as serum bilirubin > 170 micromol/litre. The interviews were held between 2.5 and 

Information 
143 
14.5 weeks postpartum. Regarding causes of jaundice, 26 mothers (55%) believed that the 
quality and quantity of breastfeeding was pertinent to this. The next most commonly raised 
theme was uncertainty, with most mothers saying they had not been given an explanation of 
jaundice. These mothers were exclusively Spanish- speaking, young, non- high-school graduates 
whose babies had undergone blood testing because of jaundice. 
Guilt was a theme in 18 (38 %) of the interviews, with quotes such as ‘got it from me’, ‘not a 
good mother’ and ‘doing something wrong’ recorded. Some mothers believed that babies were 
born with jaundice or that it was a normal part of  giving birth, attributing it to labour or bruising 
during delivery, or adjustment to a new environment. The mothers indicated that blood 
sampling was distressing both for them and their babies. 
In all, 27 mothers (57%) perceived neonatal jaundice to be a serious condition and outlined the 
following important issues as causing them concern: 
• lack of preparedness for seeing their baby become yellow 
• lack of knowledge about, and understanding of, jaundice 
• severity of the clinical course 
• concerns about possible effects of jaundice on their baby 
• prolonged jaundice. 
Of the 20 mothers who were not concerned, ten  reported that their baby appeared healthy and 
was feeding well despite being jaundiced. These mothers expressed confusion about the need 
to seek m edical advice for jaundice if the baby appeared healthy. Of these 20 mothers, five  of 
their babies had breast milk jaundice and five had had blood tests but did not require treatment. 
The remaining ten women had no concerns because they had received prompt information and 
reassurance about jaundice. Again their babies had needed only minimal intervention. 
Maternal anxiety increased in proportion to the severity of hyperbilirubinaemia. Many mothers 
had been told that high bilirubin levels can cause brain damage, but only some had been given 
the specific advice about such levels, so others were uncertain, and worried about the risks facing 
their own babies. For the 23 babies who underwent phototherapy, mothers recalled hearing and 
seeing their babies crying, and their own distress at being unable to comfort them at the time. 
Most women expressed a preference for being informed about jaundice prenatally, while others 
wanted information at discharge or only in the event of their baby becoming jaundiced. 
Preferred formats for communicating information included individual verbal communication, 
small group discussions, written pamphlets and videos. Mothers requested more detailed 
information regarding causes of jaundice, information that addressed maternal responsibilities, 
management procedures, potential effects of jaundice and its treatment, anticipated duration of 
jaundice, and measures that they could take themselves to prevent jaundice and to care for 
jaundiced babies. 
Support from mothers who had previously experienced neonatal jaundice was especially 
welcome: their shared experiences reassured mothers and improved their understanding of 
jaundice. [EL III] 
Evidence summary 
The focus -group studies from the USA, both EL  III, illustrate the need for provision of more 
information to parents of newborn babies about jaundice. Mothers expressed a preference for 
prenatal information and for further information and support to be given at diagnosis and during 
treatment. Maternal anxiety increased in proportion to the severity of jaundice, but prompt 
information and reassurance can help to allay this. 
GDG translation from evidence 
There is little published evidence concerning the effectiveness of, and satisfaction with, 
provision of parental information in the management of jaundice. Qualitative research 
highlights areas of both good and bad practice. In one small study , mothers who received timely 
information reported less concern than mothers who were not kept informed of their baby’s 
progress. The same study found that most women expressed a preference for being informed 
about jaundice prenatally. More detailed information is needed regarding causes of jaundice, 

Neonatal jaundice 
144 
information that addresses  maternal responsibilities, management, potential effects of jaundice 
and its treatment, anticipated duration of jaundice, and what mothers can do for their babies, 
both pre-emptively and after jaundice has appeared. 
The GDG suggests that increasing awareness of jaundice in prenatal  classes and on postnatal 
wards will empower and support mothers of newborn babies. Timely information and support 
throughout the monitoring and treatment process will help to allay parental anxiety.  
 
Recommendations – 8 Informaton 
Offer parents or carers information about neonatal jaundice that is tailored to their needs and 
expressed concerns. This information should be provided through verbal discussion backed 
up by written information. Care should be taken to avoid causing unnecessary anxiety to 
parents or carers. Information should include: 
• factors that influence the development of significant hyperbilirubinaemia  
• how to check the baby for jaundice 
• what to do if they suspect jaundice 
• the importance of recognising jaundice in the first 24 hours and of seeking urgent medical 
advice  
• the importance of checking the baby’s nappies for dark urine or pale chalky stools  
• the fact that neonatal jaundice is common, and reassurance that it is usually transient and 
harmless 
• reassurance that breastfeeding can usually continue. 
Offer parents or carers information about treatment for hyperbilirubinaemia, including:  
• anticipated duration of treatment 
• reassurance that breastfeeding, nappy-changing and cuddles can usually continue. 
Encourage mothers of breastfed babies with jaundice to breastfeed frequently, and to wake 
the baby for feeds if necessary. 
Provide lactation/feeding support to breastfeeding mothers whose baby is visibly jaundiced  
Offer parents or carers verbal and written information on phototherapy including all of the 
following: 
• why phototherapy is being considered 
• why phototherapy may be needed to treat significant hyperbilirubinaemia  
• the possible adverse effects of phototherapy 
• the need for eye protection and routine eye care 
• reassurance that short breaks for feeding, nappy changing and cuddles will be encouraged  
• what might happen if phototherapy fails 
• rebound jaundice 
• potential long-term adverse effects of phototherapy 
• potential impact on breastfeeding and how to minimise this. 
Offer parents or carers information on exchange transfusion including: 
• the fact that exchange transfusion requires that the baby be admitted to an intensive care 
bed 
• why an exchange transfusion is being considered 
• why an exchange transfusion may be needed to treat significant hyperbilirubinaemia  
• the possible adverse effects of exchange transfusions 
• when it will be possible for parents or carers to see and hold the baby after the exchange 
transfusion. 
Offer parents or carers information on IVIG including: 
• why IVIG is being considered 
• why IVIG may be needed to treat significant hyperbilirubinaemia  
• the possible adverse effects of IVIG 
• when it will be possible for parents or carers to see and hold the baby.  
 

 
145 
 Appendix A 
 Scope 
1 Guideline title 
Neonatal jaundice 
1.1 Short title 
Neonatal jaundice 
2 Background 
a) The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (‘NICE’ or ‘the Institute’) has 
commissioned the National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health to 
develop a clinical guideline on the recognition and treatment of infants with neonatal 
jaundice for use in the NHS in England and Wales. This follows referral of the topic by the 
Department of Health (see appendix). The guideline will provide recommendations for good 
practice that are based on the best available evidence of clinical and c ost-effectiveness. 
b) The Institute’s clinical guidelines support the implementation of National Service Frameworks 
(NSFs) in aspects of care for which a Framework has been published. The statements in each 
NSF reflect the evidence that was used at the time the Framework was prepared. The clinical 
guidelines and technology appraisals published by NICE after an NSF has been issued will 
have the effect of updating the Framework. 
c) NICE clinical guidelines support the role of healthcare professionals in providing care in 
partnership with patients, taking account of their individual needs and preferences, and 
ensuring that patients (and their carers and families, if appropriate) can make informed 
decisions about their care and treatment. 
3 C linical need for the guideline 
a) Jaundice is one of the most common conditions requiring medical attention in newborn 
babies. Approximately 60% of term and 80% of preterm babies develop jaundice in the 1st 
week of life, and about 10% of breastfed babies are still jaundiced at 1 month of age. In most 
infants with jaundice there is no underlying disease, and this early jaundice (termed 
‘physiological jaundice’) is generally harmless. 
b) Neonatal jaundice refers to the yellow colouration of the skin and the sclera of newborn 
babies that result from accumulation of bilirubin in the skin and mucous membranes. This is 
associated with a raised level of bilirubin in the body, a condition known as 
hyperbilirubinaemia. 
c) Bilirubin is a breakdown product of the red cells in the blood. Red cell breakdown produces 
unconjugated (or ‘indirect’) bilirubin, which is partly bound to albumin. Normally this is 
metabolised in the liver to produce conjugated (or ‘direct’) bilirubin, which then circulates 
through the gut and is excreted in the urine and the stool. 
d) Newborn babies have more circulating red cells and a shortened red cell lifespan, so the 
bilirubin levels are higher than they are later in life. The breakdown and excretion of 
bilirubin is also slower. Thus degrees of hyperbilirubinaemia occurring as a result of this 
normal physiological mechanism are common in newborn babies and usually benign 
(harmless) compared with adult levels. 

Neonatal jaundice 
146 
e) Breastfed infants are more likely to develop physiological jaundice within the 1st week of 
life. Prolonged jaundice, that is jaundice persisting beyond the first 14 days, is also seen more 
commonly in these infants. The mechanism for this ‘breast milk jaundice syndrome’ is still 
not completely understood and the condition appears to be generally harmless.  
f) Jaundice may also have other, non-physiological, causes, including blood group 
incompatibility (Rhesus, ABO or similar problems), other causes of haemolysis, sepsis, 
bruising and metabolic disorders. Gilbert's and Crigler–Najjar syndromes are rare causes of 
neonatal jaundice. Deficiency of a particular enzyme, glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase 
(G6PD), can cause severe neonatal jaundice. G6PD deficiency is more common in certain 
ethnic groups and runs in families. Congenital obstruction and deformities affecting the 
biliary system, such as in the condition known as biliary atresia, cause an obstructive 
jaundice associated with conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. This condition needs specialist 
management and surgical treatment. 
g) In young babies, unconjugated bilirubin can penetrate across the membrane that lies 
between the brain and the blood (the blood-brain barrier). Unconjugated bilirubin is 
potentially toxic to neural tissue (brain and spinal cord) because it acts as a ‘cell poison’ 
slowing essential processes. Entry of unconjugated bilirubin into the brain can cause both 
short-term and long-term neurological dysfunction. Acute problems include lethargy, 
abnormal muscle tone, irritability, temporary cessation of breathing (apnoea) and 
convulsions. This presentation is known as acute bilirubin encephalopathy. This deposition of 
bilirubin causes a yellow staining of a particular part of the deep neural tissue (the deep grey 
matter) within the brain; this staining is referred to as ‘kernicterus’. The term kernicterus is 
also used to denote a group of signs typical of chronic bilirubin encephalopathy. These signs 
include athetoid cerebral palsy, hearing loss, visual and dental problems. The exact level of 
bilirubin that is likely to cause neurotoxicity in any individual baby varies, and depends on 
the interplay of multiple factors that probably include acidosis, postnatal age, rate of rise of 
bilirubin level, serum albumin concentration, and whether the baby has another illness at the 
time (including infection). 
h) Although neonatal jaundice is very common, kernicterus is very rare. There is a poor 
correlation between levels of bilirubin in the body and the clinical features of bilirubin 
encephalopathy. There seems to be tremendous variability in susceptibility towards bilirubin 
encephalopathy among newborns for a variety of unexplained reasons. However, there are 
certain factors that probably influence the passage of bilirubin into the brain and hence 
increase the risk of acute bilirubin encephalopathy. These include dehydration, preterm birth, 
respiratory distress, sepsis, hypoxia, seizures, acidosis and hypoalbuminaemia. The rate of 
rise of the level of bilirubin is probably important, hence the increased risk of kernicterus in 
babies with haemolytic disease such as G6PD deficiency or Rhesus haemolytic disease. 
i) The correlation between actual bilirubin levels and kernicterus is poor for the various reasons 
discussed above in 3 g and h. Kernicterus in healthy term babies with none of the factor s (as 
described above) is virtually unknown below a threshold level of 425 micromoles of bilirubin 
per litre of serum, but the number of cases rises above this threshold level and the risk of 
kernicterus is greatly increased in full term newborns with bilirubin levels above 
515 micromol/litre. Kernicterus is also known to occur at lower levels of bilirubin in full term 
babies who have any of the factors described in 3 h. 
j) Levels of bilirubin can be controlled by placing the baby under a lamp emitting light in the 
blue spectrum; this is known as phototherapy. Light energy in the appropriate part of the 
spectrum converts the bilirubin in the skin to a harmless form that can be excreted in the 
urine. Phototherapy has proved a very efficient safe and effective treatment for jaundice in 
newborns, reducing the need to perform an exchange transfusion of blood (the only other 
means of removing bilirubin from the body). 
k) Clinical recognition and assessment of jaundice can be difficult. This is particularly the cas e 
in babies with darker skin. Once the diagnosis is made, there is uncertainty about when to 
treat raised bilirubin levels and there are variations in the use of phototherapy, exchange 
transfusion and other treatments. There is a need for more uniform, evidence -based practice, 
and for more widespread consensus-based practice in areas lacking evidence. 

Appendix A: Scope 
147 
4 The guideline 
a) The guideline development process is described in detail in two publications that are 
available from the NICE website (see ‘Further information’). ‘The guideline development 
process: an overview for stakeholders, the public and the NHS’ describes how organisations 
can become involved in the development of a guideline. ‘The guidelines manual’ provides 
advice on the technical aspects of guideline development. 
b) This document is the scope. It defines exactly what this guideline will (and will not) examine, 
and what the guideline developers will consider. The scope is based on the referral from the 
Department of Health (see appendix). 
c) The areas that will be addressed by the guideline are described in the following sections.  
4.1 Population 
4.1.1 Groups that will be covered 
a) All newborn infants (both term and preterm) from birth to 28 days. 
b) Special attention will be given to the recognition and management of neonatal jaundice in 
babies with darker skin. 
4.1.2 Groups that will not be covered 
a) Babies with jaundice that lasts beyond the first 28 days. 
b) Babies with jaundice that requires surgical treatment to correct the underlying cause. 
c) Management of babies with conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. 
4.2 Healthcare setting 
a) The guideline will cover management in primary (including community care) and secondary 
care. Guidance regarding tertiary referral will also be included. 
4.3 Clinical management 
a) Identification of factors that increase the risk of kernicterus in a baby with jaundice  
b) Recognition and management in primary care (includes community care).  
• Role and timing of assessment in primary care. 
• Estimation of hyperbilirubinaemia and its management. 
• Management at home, in the community and after discharge. 
• Indications for referral to secondary care 
c) Recognition and management in secondary care. 
• Assessment in secondary care. 
• Investigations including: 
– bilirubin – components and methods of estimation 
– other relevant haematological and biochemical tests 
– urine tests 
– screening for metabolic disorders 
– end tidal carbon monoxide concentration 
• Timing of lab investigations including point of care testing. Indications for referral to 
tertiary care. 
d) Treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia. 
• Interpretation of bilirubin levels and use of nomograms. 
• Phototherapy (various modalities). 
• Blood exchange transfusion. 
• Other treatment modalities. 
• Role of nutritional support and rehydration. 
e) Outcomes that will be considered: 
• major outcomes: 
– mortality 
– morbidity, seizures 
– neurological complications (immediate, short-term and long-term) 
– impact on resource use and costs 
• other outcomes: 

Neonatal jaundice 
148 
– auditory, visual and other non-neurological complications 
– hospital admission (duration, frequency, acquired infections) 
– effect on maternal infant bonding, breastfeeding and family bonding 
f) Information and support that should be given to parents and carers: 
• at the time of initial presentation 
• after diagnosis and during management 
• about long-term effects, including significant morbidities and functional outcome.  
g) Note that guideline recommendations will normally fall within licensed indications; 
exceptionally and only if clearly supported by evidence, use outside a licensed indication 
may be recommended. The guideline will assume that prescribers will use the summary of 
product characteristics to inform their decisions for individual patients. 
h) The guideline development group will take reasonable steps to identify ineffective 
interventions and approaches to care. If robust and credible recommendations for re -
positioning the intervention for optimal use, or changing the approach to care to make more 
efficient use of resources can be made, they will be clearly stated. If the resources released 
are substantial, consideration will be given to listing such recommendations in the ‘Key 
priorities for implementation’ section of the guideline. 
4.4 Status 
4.4.1 Scope 
This is the final scope. 
Related NICE guidance 
• Diabetes in pregnancy: management of diabetes and its complications from pre -conception to 
the postnatal period. NICE clinical guideline 63. Available from www.nice.org.uk/CG063 
• Intrapartum care: care of healthy women and their babies during childbirth. NICE clinical 
guideline 55. Available from www.nice.org.uk/CG055 
• Routine postnatal care of women and their babies. NICE clinical guideline 37. Available from 
www.nice.org.uk/CG037 
• Antenatal care: routine care for the healthy pregnant woman. NICE clinical guideline 6. 
Available from www.nice.org.uk/CG006 
4.4.2 Guideline 
The development of the guideline recommendations will begin in April 2008.  
5 Further information 
Information on the guideline development process is provided in: 
• ‘The guideline development process: an overview for stakeholders, the public and the NHS’  
• ‘The guidelines manual’. 
These are available as PDF files from the NICE website (www.nice.org.uk/guidelinesmanual). 
Information on the progress of the guideline will also be available from the website.  
 Appendix: Referral from the Department of Health 
The Department of Health asked NICE: 
‘To prepare a clinical guideline on the recognition and treatment decisions of babies who are 
jaundiced.’ 

 
149 
 Appendix B 
 Declarations of interest 
This appendix includes all interests declared on or before 28 January 2010.  
A.1 GDG members 
Cristiana Aride 
No interests declared 
Jeffery Barron 
No interests declared 
Yvonne Benjamin 
No interests declared 
Sally Cottrell 
No interests declared 
Karen Ford 
No interests declared 
Kevin Ives 
Personal pecuniary interest 
Receives medico-legal instructions from solicitors acting for Claimants and Defendants to write 
expert reports in cases of litigation involving jaundice mediated brain injury in the newborn 
(kernicterus). 
Personal non-pecuniary interest 
Member of the Neonatal Society ; Member of the British Association of Perinatal Medicine ; 
Fellow of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health; Published on Neonatal Jaundice, 
including a chapter in Rennie and Roberton’s Textbook of Neonatology, Third and Fourth 
Editions, Churchill Livingstone, 1999, 2005. 
Maria Jenkins 
No interests declared 
Alison Johns 
No interests declared 
Donal Manning 
Personal non-pecuniary interest 
Published a peer-reviewed perspective in Archives of Disease in Childhood 2009, in which the 
opinions expressed were formed by personal knowledge of, and evidence review of, neonatal 
jaundice. 
Farrah Pradhan 
No interests declared 

Neonatal jaundice 
150 
Janet Rennie 
Personal pecuniary interest 
Payment received from the Legal Aid Board and the National Health Service Litigation Authority 
for independent expert medico legal reports for civil proceedings in cases of kernicterus. This 
work is undertaken outside of NHS time. 
Personal non-pecuniary interest 
Conducted research survey on the management of neonatal jaundice in the UK (work was done 
and submitted before accepting the post of Chair) published in the Archives of Disease in 
Childhood 2009. No funding or grant was received for this work. 
Debra Teasdale 
No interests declared 
A.2 NCC-WCH staff and contractors 
M Qutayba Almerie 
No interests declared 
Shona Burman-Roy 
No interests declared 
Katherine Cullen 
No interests declared 
Rajesh Khanna 
No interests declared 
Hannah Rose Douglas 
No interests declared 
Paul Jacklin 
No interests declared 
Juliet Kenny 
No interests declared 
Rosalind Lai 
No interests declared 
Hugh McGuire  
No interests declared 
Kristina Pedersen 
No interests declared 
Edmund Peston 
No interests declared 
Stephen Murphy 
No interests declared 
Manveet Patel 
No interests declared 
Itrat Iqbal 
No interests declared 

Appendix B: Declarations of interest 
151 
Jay Bannerjee 
No interests declared 
Carolina Ortega 
No interests declared 
Anuradha Sekhri 
No interests declared 
Martin Whittle 
Personal pecuniary interests 
Adviser to National Screening Committee in relation to obstetric ultrasound services  
A.3 External advisers 
None 
 

 
152 
 Appendix C 
 Economic evaluation of alternative testing strategies in the 
detection of hyperbilirubinaemia 
C.1 Introduction 
Jaundice (a yellow colouration of the skin) is caused by hyperbilirubinaemia and is common in 
the newborn baby. Rarely, if bilirubin levels are sufficiently high, bilirubin can cross the blood–
brain barrier and cause a brain- damaging condition called kernicterus, a lifelong disabling 
neurological problem with manifestations of cerebral palsy and deafness with high costs of care.  
Hyperbilirubinaemia can also cause deafness without cerebral palsy , and other adverse 
outcomes have been described. Levels of bilirubin can be controlled with phototherapy, but the 
only way to reduce very high levels in an emergency is with an exchange transfusion. This is a 
costly intensive care procedure that carries a mortality risk. Phototherapy is generally effective in 
controlling bilirubin levels, preventing them from rising to a level at which kernicterus occurs, 
and hence some clinicians have called for kernicterus to be classified as a ‘ never event ’.231 
There is some evidence to show that cases of kernicterus have risen recently, probably as a 
result of earlier discharge following childbirth.232;233 
Current practice in England and Wales is varied but the GDG estimate s that fewer than 10% of 
babies undergo specific testing of their bilirubin levels following visual examination. At present, 
babies who develop kernicterus often present late and with bilirubin levels already in the toxic 
range. The key to prevention of kernicterus is early detection of cases at a time when 
phototherapy can be effective. Any guideline recommendation that requires more widespread 
testing will have important resource implications for the NHS as well as require  a change in 
practice in many places. Therefore the guideline recommendation regarding identification of 
cases by testing for hyperbilirubinaemia was highlighted by the GDG as an important priority 
for economic analysis. The NHS operates within resource constraints and a more intensive 
testing and treatment strategy can only be justified if it represents a better use of scarce 
resources than could be obtained in some alternative use of those resources.  
C.2 Literature review 
A literature search was undertaken to assess the economic evidence base for strategies to 
prevent kernicterus in newborn babies. This initial search yielded 33 papers and the abstracts of 
these papers were read to exclude papers that were clearly not relevant. As a result of this initial 
screen, five papers were retrieved , of which only one was identified as a relevant economic 
evaluation. 
This was a US study that compared the cost- effectiveness of four strategies against current 
practice to prevent kernicterus in newborn infants .234 An incremental cost-effectiveness analysis 
was undertaken using a decision- analytic framework. The strategies were modelled for a 
population of healthy term infants who were being discharged within 48 hours of an 
uncomplicated vaginal birth. The strategies were: 
1. current practice – physicians and nurses assess the need for serum bilirubin testing after 
delivery and prior to discharge based on a review of clinical history and physic al 
examination, including visual inspection of skin colour; clinical judgement and assessment of 
risk are used to determine the timing of follow-up 
2. universal follow-up 1–2 days after early discharge, but in other respects similar to the first 
strategy 

Appendix C: Economic evaluation of testing strategies for hyperbilirubinaemia 
153 
3. routine serum bilirubin testing prior to discharge with follow-up within 2 days of discharge if 
the bilirubin measurement is greater than the 40th percentile value on the nomogram 
4. routine transcutaneous bilirubin testing prior to discharge with the percentile value on the 
nomogram developed by Bhuthani et al.34 guiding decisions about the need for serum 
bilirubin testing before discharge and subsequent follow-up. 
In strategies 2–4 the threshold for laboratory testing is lowered in recognition of the unreliability 
of visual estimation of bilirubin. 
The authors estimated that with current practice 2.3% of infants would receive phototherapy 
compared with 8.1%, 5.6%, and 7.8% for strategies 2–4, respectively. The savings from an 
averted kernicterus case were assumed to be $921,000 (at 2003 prices). The authors assumed 
that strategies 2–4 would be equally effective at preventing kernicterus cases and their primary 
outcome was to estimate the cost per kernicterus case averted in each of those strategies , with a 
relative risk reduction of 0.7, an assumption made in the absence of data.  
The results suggested that routine serum bilirubin was the cheapest strategy at $5.75 million per 
case averted. Using transcutaneous bilirubin meters prior to discharge gave a cost per averted 
kernicterus case of $9.19 million. Universal screening was the most expensive strategy , with a 
cost per case  averted of $10.32 million. One -way sensitivity analysis suggested that the 
magnitude of these costs were sensitive to incidence of kernicterus although this did not alter 
the ranking of the strategies in terms of costs. The authors concluded that their data suggested 
that it would be premature to implement large-scale routine bilirubin screening. 
However, there are often difficulties in generalising the result of an economic evaluation from 
one setting to another. In particular , the US hospital charges seem unlikely to accurately  reflect 
NHS costs and the costs of a kernicterus case may have been understated. Furthermore, the 
GDGs remit did not cover screening. Therefore, a de novo economic model was developed to 
reflect the UK context and to enable the GDG to consider cost- effectiveness issues in making 
their recommendations. 
C.3 Background to the economic evaluation 
Kernicterus is a largely preventable disease if severe hyperbilirubinaemia is identified early and 
promptly treated (using phototherapy or, for more acute cases, exchange transfusion). Therefore, 
early identification of raised (or rapidly rising) bilirubin levels is the key to reducing severe 
morbidity. 
There are studies which demonstrate that more intensive monitoring reduces the need for 
exchange transfusions. Evidence from the USA reports that during the 1970s kernicterus was 
practically eradicated, which was probably due to the liberal use of phototherapy .235 The 
disease re-emerged in the 1990s, largely among babies cared for in the home environment in 
the neonatal period, often with limited medical supervision during the first week after birth. 235 
Kernicterus has fallen again in the US A since the adoption of the 1994 American Academy of 
Pediatrics (AAP ) guidelines;123 estimates are that the rate has fallen from 5.1 per 100 000 in 
1988 to 1.5 per 100 000.124 
In the UK, babies are discharged earlier and are monitored less often than in previous 
decades.236 Reduced contact with experienced midwives and reliance on intermittent visual 
examination to assess bilirubin levels may be one of the reasons  for the failure to detect babies 
with significantly elevated serum bilirubin levels. A newborn baby might only be visited once 
by a midwife in the postnatal period if there are no risk factors, although the norm is currently 
around two or three visits in the first week. Visual examination by a midwife to assess for 
jaundice during these postnatal visits is currently the standard of care, with a small proportion of 
these jaundiced children being subjected to a total serum bilirubin (TSB) blood test based on  
clinical visual assessment of the level of bilirubin. This is known to be unreliable. There is 
strong evidence that visual examination alone cannot be used to assess the level of bilirubin in a 
baby (see Chapter 5 on recognition). The inaccuracy of visual assessment for the detection of 
bilirubin levels, particularly in babies with dark skin tones, is likely to be a major factor 
responsible for the late presentation of babies with significant hyperbilirubinaemia. Therefore a 

Neonatal jaundice 
154 
more reliable strategy for the detection of babies who require treatment with phototherapy may 
be required if it is cost-effective. 
The cost of the care of a person with kernicterus throughout their life runs to millions of pounds. 
If resources were invested in a testing strategy that i s effective in reducing the number of cases 
of kernicterus annually by one case per year, it would be cost saving if the total annual cost of 
the strategy w ere less than the discounted lifetime cost of caring for one individual with the 
disease. Since kernicterus is a lifetime condition with poor quality of life, the value that the NHS 
places on preventing a case of kernicterus is not only calculated as the cost saved by preventing 
the downstream costs but also the £20,000 per quality -adjusted life year (QA LY) over the 
lifetime of the condition. Clearly, if the intervention were more successful in preventing 
kernicterus, then more NHS resources could be used to identify hyperbilirubinaemia and still be 
cost-effective. 
It seems plausible that a more intensive  testing strategy could be clinically effective if it 
overcomes the limitations of visual examination alone, thereby leading to better detection and 
treatment. Currently, there are two methods of testing: a TSB and a transcutaneous 
bilirubinometer (TCB), w hich is a non- invasive test on the surface of the skin. TCB is probably 
not accurate above a threshold level of 250 micromol/litre of bilirubin so that TSB testing is 
required in babies whose TCB is above this threshold level. Hence a strategy involving more 
bilirubin measurements could be based on TSB alone or TCB with TSB only required for those 
babies whose TCB level was higher than the threshold value. Current evidence does not favour 
one strategy over the other for the detection of babies with bilirubin levels under 
250 micromols/litre. That is, even though TSB is the gold standard test, both strategies, when 
used correctly as part of a n assessment and management process to test babies who are visibly 
jaundiced, would be equally effective at detecting hyperbilirubinaemia and preventing 
kernicterus. Both methods are in use in the NHS. The TSB can be analysed in hospital 
laboratories without the need for additional equipment. The TCB requires the purchase of hand-
held devices, sufficient for one to be available for each community midwife undertaking 
postnatal visits on any particular day. 
The economic evaluation was undertaken to determine the conditions under which increased 
testing would be cost- effective, and to explore which testing strategy would be co st-effective 
under different circumstances. 
C.4 Method 
In this analysis we evaluate the cost- effectiveness of moving from current practice to a more 
intensive test strategy in England and Wales subject to the limitations of the published evidence.  
The following strategies are compared: 
1. ‘Current practice’ – a visual examination followed by TSB in 10% of visually jaundiced 
babies 
2. TSB – a TSB on all babies with a positive visual examination 
3. TCB followed by TSB if positive TCB – a TCB on all babies with a positive visual 
examination, with a TSB on those babies with a positive TCB. 
Visual examination has a high negative predictive value , which means that babies who do not 
appear visually jaundiced are very unlikely to have clinically significant jaundice . However, 
visual examination has been shown to be unreliable in detecting the severity of 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Therefore, visual examination alone as a basis for detecting jaundice 
requiring phototherapy has poor sensitivity , which may put jaundiced babie s at a higher risk of 
developing kernicterus. 
Detection of hyperbilirubinaemia requiring treatment or further monitoring can be better 
assessed using a TCB  or a blood test to measure the TSB. The TCB is done with a hand-held 
device (such as the  Minolta JM-103 or the BiliChek) that is simple to use and is placed on the 
baby’s skin. The TSB is the gold standard test but is more invasive and distressing to the baby 
since it requires a blood sample. Both tests can be carried out by the midwife during the home 
visit or in hospital if the baby has not been discharged. 

Appendix C: Economic evaluation of testing strategies for hyperbilirubinaemia 
155 
Diagnostic tests are usually evaluated according to their sensitivity and specificity and these 
characteristics can be used to generate probabilities in decision- analytic models. Initially, we 
intended to compare the alternative strategies using such an approach. However, the decision-
making process in this context is far more complicated than that implied by the outcomes for a 
‘two by two table ’. Rather than the test result dividing the patient population neatly into 
positives and negatives for hyperbilirubinaemia, ‘raised bilirubin level’ is measured on a  
continuum from normal to severe disease and different test thresholds are used to stratify 
patients into groups requiring immediate treatment, further monitoring or transfer  back to 
routine care. Decision- making is affected implicitly in a Bayesian manner by the impact of the 
bilirubin level on the post-test probability of disease. The decision-making is complicated further 
as a number of other factors, such as family history of jaundice, will also be taken into account. 
Furthermore, monitoring can occur at many points in time and this temporal aspect is important 
because thresholds for clinically significant jaundice change and the evidence base to track 
changes in diagnostic accuracy over the relevant time periods is lacking. Therefore, it was 
ultimately decided that there was not sufficient published evidence to populate such a decision 
model. Furthermore, it was felt that the GDG would not be able to estimate the vast array of 
model parameters to reflect the actual micro decision- making process that occurs in actual 
clinical practice. 
The GDG has  set a higher bilirubin threshold as a basis for treatment and a lower bilirubin 
threshold for further monitoring. The rationale for this is to avoid unnecessary phototherapy (i.e. 
a high specificity or false positive rate in terms of treatment) while  avoiding missed cases by 
continued monitoring in babies who have an intermediate bilirubin level (i.e. a high sensitivity 
or false negative rate in terms of monitoring). While the TCB is not thought to be reliable at high 
bilirubin levels (hence the need for TSB if TCB is positive), it is nevertheless thought to be 
accurate at the more intermediate levels. 
The GDG opinion is that, using the thresholds defined in this guideline, either method of testing 
would be effective in detecting hyperbilirubinaemia and avoiding new cases of kernicterus.  
Therefore, the cost- effective strategy was estimated using a cost- minimisation approach that  
assumes no difference in effectiveness between testing strategies. As noted earlier, there is 
insufficient evidence to estimate the incremental benefit of moving from ‘ current practice’ to a 
more intensive testing regime, although evidence on the limitations of visual examination 
suggests that some benefit is likely. Therefore, threshold analyses were undertaken to determine 
the number of kernicterus cases that a more intensive testing approach would have to avert in 
order for this to be considered cost-effective. 
C.5 Model parameters and assumptions 
The cost analysis was undertaken from the perspective of the NHS and personal social services , 
which is in accordance with the NICE guidelines manual 
(www.nice.org.uk/guidelinesmanual).237 The costs were estimated using a bottom- up or 
‘ingredients’ approach, which involves detailing the physical quantity of resources used in 
providing treatment alongside the unit cost of those resources. From this it is possible to 
estimate the total cost of treatment. 
It was assumed that visual examination is undertaken in the first instance in all strategies. In the 
‘current practice ’ strategy, it was additionally assumed that visual examination is used to 
determine the severity of hyperbilirubinaemia with a proportion of these having a TSB blood 
test as a precursor to possible phototherapy.  No cost has been applied to the visual examination 
as it is assumed this would occur as part of the standard home visit carried out by a midwife or 
as part of standard hospital care if the baby had not been discharged. 
The population characteristics for this analysis are shown in Table C.1. Economic parameters 
used in the assessment of cost benefit (other than the costs of the test strategies) are shown in 
Table C.2. It should be noted that the ba se-case values for the cost and QALY loss of a 
kernicterus case should not be considered point estimates in a conventional sense. Considerable 
uncertainty surrounds both values and therefore, as part of sensitivity analysis, both are varied 
simultaneously to derive a cost-effectiveness threshold across a wide combination of values. 

Neonatal jaundice 
156 
The base-case estimate of the lifetime cost of kernicterus is based on a legal settlement and, as 
such, may include costs over and above those which are deemed relevant for the perspective 
used by NICE in economic evaluation. A US study234 used mean lifetime direct and indirect 
costs of cerebral palsy as a proxy for kernicterus costs and as a result used a cost of $921,000 (at 
2003 prices). However, this method may underestimate the costs as kernicterus is associated 
with severe cerebral palsy. Also, untreated hyperbilirubinaemia can also cause hearing loss 
without cerebral palsy with a need for cochlear implants and the potential cost savings from 
averting these complications are not explicitly considered within the model. The base -case 
QALY loss of a kernicterus case can be considered as an upper bound estimate as it is based on 
assuming a health state that is as bad as death. 
Table C.1 Population characteristics 
Item Value Source Notes 
Births 690 000 Office for 
National 
Statistics 
(2008)238  
Based on 2007 births  
Babies identified as 
jaundiced on visual 
examination 
60% GDG  
Babies currently tested 
for jaundice on basis 
of visual examination 
10% GDG Testing is assumed to be with TSB 
Mean number of tests 
per baby testeda 
1.33 Kuzniewicz et 
al. (2008)11 
Pre-universal screening this US study estimated 0.8 tests 
per baby. We assumed that this was based on 60% of 
babies being tested, on the basis of the GDG’s estimate 
of babies identified as visually jaundiced in the UK. A 
weighted average was then used to estimate the tests 
per baby in the 60% tested that would give an average 
of 0.8 tests per baby overall. In addition, the GDG 
considered this a reasonable estimate. 
a A TCB positive followed by a TSB is considered as a single test for the purposes of this analysis. 
 
Table C.2 Cost–benefit parameters 
Item Value Sensitivity analysis 
range 
Source  
Kernicterus case  £5.5 million  £0–10 million JMW Clinical 
Negligence Solicitors  
www.jmw.co.uk/kernicter
us_bilirubinaemia 
Discount rate 3.5%  NICE guidelines manual 
(2009)237 
Both costs and QALYs are 
discounted 
QALY gained per 
kernicterus case 
avoided 
25 0– 25  Calculation This is an approximation, 
based on an assumption 
that the quality of life 
with kernicterus is not 
much better than death 
Willingness to 
pay for a QALY 
£20,000  NICE guidelines manual 
(2009)237 
An advisory threshold 
 
The resource ‘ingredients’ and their unit costs for TSB and TCB are shown in Table C.3 and 
Table C.4, respectively. The resource items include any of the additional staff time required to 
undertake a  test as part of a routine postnatal visit. It also includes equipment costs and 
consumables, those resources that are used up in the provision of the test that cannot be reused.  

Appendix C: Economic evaluation of testing strategies for hyperbilirubinaemia 
157 
Table C.3 TSB resources and costs 
Resources Unit cost Source Notes 
Clinical nurse 
specialist 
£69.00 PSSRU (2008)239 
(www.pssru.ac.uk/pdf/uc/uc2008/uc200
8.pdf) 
It is assumed that it would take 
10 minutes to perform this test  
Venous blood test £7.00 GDG estimate One per test  
Gloves £0.06 medisave.co.uk, accessed 16 July 2009 £6.27 per 100; one pair per test 
Table C.4 TCB resources and costs 
Resources Unit cost Source Notes 
Clinical nurse 
specialist 
£69.00 PSSRU (2008)239 It is assumed that it would take 
1 minute to perform this test  
TCB meter £3,400 
£3,600 
 
Manufacturer, JM-103 
Manufacturer, BiliChek 
No consumables required 
 
Calibration tips  £5.50 Manufacturer, BiliChek  
TSB £18.56 Marginal cost of TSB (see Table C.3) It is estimated that 25% of TCB 
tests would be positive leading 
to a TSB 
 
The purchase of medical equipment, TCB meters in this case, carries an opportunity cost that 
differs from operating costs such as labour and consumables in certain respects. The purchase of 
TCB meters involves an upfront payment before use. However, that cost is fixed as it does not 
vary with the quantity of treatment provided. The equipment can often be used over a number 
of years before it needs to be replaced. 
The equipment costs have two facets: 
• o pportunity cost – the money spent on the equipment could have been invested in some 
other venture yielding positive benefits; it is calculated by applying an interest rate to the sum 
invested in the equipment 
• d epreciation cost – the equipment has a certain lifespan and depreciates over time; 
eventually, the equipment has to be replaced. 
In economic evaluation, the usual practice is to annuitise the initial capital outlay over the 
expected life of the equipment to give an ‘equivalent annual cost’. Calculating the equivalent 
annual cost means making an allowance for the differential timing of costs, using discounting.  
The formula for calculating the equivalent annual cost is given below:  
 
 
1 A,
n
KS rE nr  
where: 
E = equivalent annual cost 
K = purchase price of equipment 
S = resale value 
r = discount (interest rate) 
n = equipment lifespan 
A(n,r) = annuity factor* (n years at interest rate r ) 
To calculate the equivalent annual cost we have assumed that the meters last 5 years and have 
no resale value. However, the total annual equivalent cost would depend on the actual number 
of meters that were necessary to deliver the strategy. This is not known and service delivery is 
not generally part of the remit of NICE guidelines. Therefore, the results are presented as a 
threshold analysis, with the  threshold being the number of meters at which the TSB strategy 
(Strategy 2) would be equivalent in cost to the TCB strategy (Strategy 3). 
                                                 
* An annuity factor converts a present valueinto an annuity, a series of equal annual payments.  

Neonatal jaundice 
158 
C.6 Results 
The marginal cost per test (excluding equipment) was estimated to be £18.56 for TSB and £5.87 
for TCB for a test requiring no consumables and £11.37 for a test requiring calibration tips.* Using 
these figures the cost per strategy was calculated as follows for the model’s default input values: 
Calculation of total costs per annum of each strategy 
1. Current practice 
 Population: 690 000 
 Tested with TSB: 690 000 × 0.1 × 0.6 = 41 400 
 TSB tests: 41 400 × 1.33 = 55 062 
 Cost: 55 062 × £18.56 = £1.02 million 
2. Strategy 2 (TSB to all visually jaundiced babies) 
 Population: 690 000 
 Visibly jaundiced: 690 000 × 0.6 = 414 000 
 TSB tests: 414 000 × 1.33 = 550 620 
 Cost: 550 620 x £18.56 = £10.22 million 
3. Strategy 3 (TCB to all visually jaundiced babies followed by TSB if TCB is positive) 
 Population: 690 000 
 Visibly jaundiced: 690 000 × 0.6 = 414 000 
 TCB tests: 414 000 × 1.33 = 550 620 
 TSB tests: 550 620 × 0.25 = 137 655 
 Cost (BiliChek): 550 620 × £11.37 = £6.26 million plus annual equivalent equipment cost 
 Cost (Minolta): 550 620 × £5.87 = £3.23 million plus annual equivalent equipment cost 
 
Figure C.1 shows how the incremental costs of the TCB strategy (for two different types of meter) 
relative to the TSB strategy vary according to the number of meters that would be necessary to 
deliver a strategy of TCB testing. The point where the lines plotting the incremental costs of TCB 
cross the horizontal axis gives the threshold number of meters for cost neutrality between TCB 
and TSB. If the TCB strategy can be delivered with fewer meters than implied by this threshold 
then it would be cheaper than the TSB strategy.  With the other model values held constant at 
their default values, Figure C.1 suggests that a TCB strategy using the cheaper meter will cost less 
than the TSB strategy providing that it can be delivered with fewer than 9200 meters. 
Figure C.2 strongly suggests that both the TSB and TCB strategies are more expensive than current 
practice in terms of test costs. This would be the case even if a much fewer than 9200 TCB meters 
were required. The cost-effectiveness of this additional testing ultimately depends on any offsetting 
savings and health gains derived as a result of improved outcomes, that is averted kernicterus 
cases. This is an unknown but the ‘what- if’ analysis presented in Figure C.3 shows the minimum 
number of kernicterus cases that would need to be averted for cost-effectiveness using the model’s 
default input values and varying the number of TCB meters.  
Figure C.2 shows the test costs of all three strategies in a scenario where 9200 meters are needed 
to deliver the TCB strategy. 
Figure C.3 shows  the total additional cost to the NHS of more intensive testing between a 
minimum of 1000 TCB meters and a maximum of 9200. The cost on the x -axis is the 
incremental cost difference between ‘current practice’ and more intensive testing. In this figure, 
the comparator with current practice is always TCB. If 9200 meters or fewer are purchased, the 
cheaper option is always TCB. If more meters are required, then the TSB strategy should be 
preferred on cost- effectiveness grounds. The figure shows that the total cost of using 9200 
meters would require an additional £9.14 million per year. The number of kernicterus cases to 
be averted would have to be at least 1.52 per year for this additional cost of testing to be cost-
effective compared with current practice. Buying only an additional 1000 meters, the total 
additional cost would be £2.96 million per year and 0.49 cases of kernicterus would need to be 
averted per year for TCB to be more cost-effective than current practice. 
                                                 
* The marginal cost of TCB reflects that 25% of tests will be followed by TSB. 

Appendix C: Economic evaluation of testing strategies for hyperbilirubinaemia 
159 
Figure C.1 Comparing the incremental costs of TCB with TSB, varying the number of TCB meters 
needed to deliver the strategy 
Figure C.2 Total test costs of the different strategies with the model’s default input values and 
assuming 9200 TCB meters 


Neonatal jaundice 
160 
Figure C.3 The minimum number of kernicterus cases to be averted at different incremental costs of 
more intensive testing 
C.7 Sensitivity analysis 
Sensitivity analysis is used in economic evaluation to assess how sensitive the results of the 
model are to the assumptions made about the model parameters, particularly those parameters 
where considerable uncertainty exists as to their actual value. One -way sensitivity analysis 
involves altering the value of a single parameter, holding all the others constant, to determine 
how sensitive the cost- effectiveness conclusion is to the assumptions made about that particular 
parameter. 
The base-case results above were presented as threshold analyses reflecting uncertainty about 
the number of meters that would be needed for the TCB strategy and the number of kernicterus 
cases that would need to be averted in order for the additional costs of more intensive costing to 
be deemed an efficient use of scarce NHS resources. However, the sensitivity analyses below 
explore how changes in other model parameters would affect results. 
C.7.1 Varying the cost of meters 
In this sensitivity analysis the cost of the meters is varied between £600 and £3,600. It is 
assumed that the meter is a Minolta and does not therefore require a new calibration tip for 
each test. The analysis additionally considers how this is affected by the number of meters 
needed to deliver the TCB testing strategy. 
Figure C.4 shows that the cost of meters is likely to be an important determinant of the cost-
effectiveness of TCB relative to TSB. As the cost of meters falls, the number of meters has far less 
impact in determining the incremental costs of the TCB strategy. 
C.7.2 Varying the mean number of tests per baby tested 
In this sensitivity analysis the mean number of tests per baby tested is varied between one and 
two tests. The analysis is repeated for different numbers of TCB meters.  
Figure C.5 shows that the incremental costs of the TCB test strategy relative to the TSB test 
strategy fall as the average number of tests per baby increase. This simply reflects that TSB test 
has the higher marginal cost. If just one test per baby were required then the threshold number 
of meters for cost neutrality would be approximately 7000. However, if babies were tested 
twice on average then that cost neutrality threshold would rise to approximately 14 000 meters. 
It should be noted that whilst more testing improves the cost-effectiveness of TCB relative to TSB 
the opposite is the case with respect to current practice. 


Appendix C: Economic evaluation of testing strategies for hyperbilirubinaemia 
161 
 
Figure C.4 Comparing the incremental costs of TCB with TSB, varying the number of TCB meters 
needed to deliver the strategy and the cost of the TCB meter 
Figure C.5 Comparing the incremental costs of TCB with TSB, varying the number of TCB meters 
needed to deliver the strategy and the mean number of tests per baby tested 
C.7.3 Simultaneously varying the QALY gain and cost averted of a kernicterus case 
These are important unknowns because together with effect size they are fundamental 
determinants of whether increased testing costs represent a good use of scarce NHS resources. The 
greater the QALY gain associated with an averted kernicterus case, the greater the NHS would be 
willing to pay for such a gain. The greater the saving from an averted kernicterus case, the more 
the additional costs of testing will be offset by a reduction in ‘downstream’ treatment costs. 
Figures C.6 and C.7 show that the number of kernicterus cases that would need to be averted 
for the TCB strategy to be considered cost- effective is very sensi tive to the costs of a kernicterus 
case. A high cost of kernicterus implies that a much lower number of cases would need to be 
averted in order to meet NICE criteria for cost- effectiveness. By comparison, increasing the 
QALY gain associated with an averted case has only a relatively small impact on the threshold 


Neonatal jaundice 
162 
cost saving from averted kernicterus cases that would be necessary for cost- effectiveness at any 
given number of averted cases. These two figures together also show the large impact the 
number of me ters has on these cost -effectiveness thresholds. For a given number of averted 
cases, a much higher saving and QALY gain is necessary for cost- effectiveness when the TSB 
strategy requires 9200 meters compared with when 2000 meters are required.  
Figure C.6 T hresholds for cost- effectiveness according to the number of kernicterus cases averted 
and the savings and QALY gain from an averted kernicterus case based on 9200 TCB meters 
Figure C.7 T hresholds for cost- effectiveness according to the number of kernicterus cases averted 
and the savings and QALY gain from an averted kernicterus case based on 2000 TCB meters 


Appendix C: Economic evaluation of testing strategies for hyperbilirubinaemia 
163 
C.8 Discussion 
The analysis compared the current testing strategy with an uplift in testing using alternative 
strategies. In the base-case analysis, the current strategy of testing only 10% of babies using TSB 
was £1.02 million per year. The next cheapest strategy was to use Strategy 3 (TCB to all visually 
jaundiced babies followed by TSB if TCB is positive) using a meter that does not require 
calibration tips which cost £10.16 million, or £13.25 million using a meter requiring a 
calibration tip. Using the TSB more intensively (on 60% of babies who are visibly jaundiced) 
would cost £10.22 million per year. The cost difference between TSB and TCB is mainly due to 
the increased time to do a blood test compared with a skin test. 
An important question is whether any change from current practice can be justified on cost-
effectiveness grounds. In part this depends on the fixed costs, that is , the number of TCB meters 
needed to deliver Strategy 3. This determines the incremental costs of increased testing if the 
TCB strategy is deemed more cost- effective than TSB, that is, the strategy with the lowest cost 
since this is a cost- minimisation analysis. In the base -case analysis, the results estimate that the 
maximum incremental cost of more intensive testing is around £9.14 million, which is the 
incremental cost of an enhanced testing strategy using TSB alone relative to current practice. If 
the strategy using the TCB could be delivered with the purchase of only 1000 additional 
bilirubinometers (which would be a highly conservative estimate) then the incremental cost 
would be £2.96 million. Figure C.3 suggests that 1.52 cases of kernicterus would have to be 
averted for more intensive testing to be considered cost -effective if the incremental testing costs 
were £9.14 million. If fewer resources were required (fewer bilirubinometers purchased) then 
fewer cases would need to be averted. This assumes a threshold QALY value of £20,000. At a 
higher threshold, say £30,000 per QALY, the number of cases of kernicterus averted in order for 
more intensive testing to be cost-effective would be fewer. 
Figure C.3 shows how this threshold of kernicterus cases that need to be averted for cost-
effectiveness falls as the incremental costs of more intensive testing fall, as is the case with a 
smaller number of TCB meters. T he evidence base is currently not sufficiently robust to assess 
whether more intensive testing would achieve such an incremental gain – there are 
approximately five to seven new kernicterus cases per year in England and Wales. However, 
given the evidence about the limitations of visual examination, the GDG is  opposed to relying 
on observations that have been demonstrated to be unreliable in the detection of severe 
hyperbilirubinaemia. It does seem plausible that a more intensive testing strategy using tests that  
are known to have greater reliability in detection of severe hyperbilirubinaemia would lead to 
more appropriate and timely intervention with a concomitant reduction in adverse outcomes.  
The costs of the TCB testing strategy vary according to the cost of the meter used. In the absence 
of evidence that health outcomes are different between types of meter used, the ch eaper 
Minolta meter should be preferred. The base -case results (see Figure C.2) suggest that, at current 
prices, the Minolta  meter would be about £3 million cheaper, assuming that the meters 
themselves are similarly priced. Therefore, in the remainder of the discussion it will be assumed 
that the analysis is based on the cheaper Minolta TCB meter. 
Figures C.1, C.3, C.4 and C.5 all show that the number of meters necessary to deliver the TCB 
strategy is important in determining the relative cost- effectiveness of the TCB strategy 
(Strategy 3) to the TSB strategy ( Strategy 2). In the base -case analysis, TCB is cheaper than TSB 
providing the number of TCB meters is less than 9200. 
If it is decided that more intensive testing is likely to be cost- effective then a secondary decision 
is whether initial testing should be done using TCB or TSB. Factors such as convenience to the 
nurse and discomfort to the baby are not irrelevant to the decision but have not been included 
explicitly in this analysis because they are difficult to quantify and probably of a relatively small 
magnitude. This analysis suggests that the choice between TCB and TSB would depend on the 
number of meters that would be required. The NHS staff census as reported on the NHS 
Information Centre website  ( www.ic.nhs.uk/statistics-and-data-collections/workforce/nhs-staff-
numbers, accessed August 2009) reports the  ‘head count’ figure for practising midwives as 
25 000 with 19 500 full-time equivalents. The base-case analyses suggest that were all midwives 
required to have a TCB meter in order to implement a TCB strategy then TSB would be the cost-

Neonatal jaundice 
164 
effective option. However, not all midwives do postnatal checks. It may be more useful to 
consider the number of postnatal checks undertaken per day. 
If we assume that each birth has, on average, three postnatal visits then this amounts to: 
 (690 000 × 3) ÷ 365 = 5670 postnatal visits per day 
Community midwives would typically do 6–1 0 postnatal visits per day, which suggests that the 
postnatal workload is managed by approximately  1000 midwives on any given day, which 
might suggest that the service could actually be delivered with fewer than 9200 meters. 
In interpreting this a nalysis, there are a number of caveats to be considered in addition to the 
most important ones already highlighted concerning the lack of evidence. The analysis assumes 
that 25% of infants will require a confirmatory TSB before consideration of phototherapy.  If this 
estimate were higher, then the total cost of the TCB strategy would be higher and the cost 
threshold at which TSB would be the preferred option would consequently be lower. The 
analysis also assumes that a move to more intensive testing does not  lead to increased 
phototherapy. This might seem a counter -intuitive assumption as the efficacy of more intensive 
testing is ultimately predicated on not missing cases that could benefit from treatment. 
However, intervention rates may also be influenced by  recommendations on thresholds for 
commencing treatment, where current practice varies. In some settings this might lead to lower, 
but more targeted, intervention than currently occurs. 
The analysis also assumes that the varous  test strategies will not differ in terms of the amount of 
testing undertaken and the number of follow-up home visits undertaken. Of course, it is possible 
that the convenience of TCB could lead to additional ‘downstream’ costs not considered here. 
An important assumption in this analysis is that phototherapy rates would not change if a mor e 
intensive testing strategy were adopted. This is a strong assumption in the model since we do 
not know how many more cases of hyperbilirubinaemia would be correctly identified by a 
change in testing strategy. 
C.9 Conclusion 
Based on the published limitations of visual examination, the GDG strongly believe s that a 
more intensive testing strategy is required in order to improve outcomes in neonatal jaundice.  
This will require more resources but, if this reduces the incidence of kernicterus by sufficient 
numbers, it would be cost-effective to implement in the NHS. While the analysis presented here 
is unable to demonstrate that this would be cost- effective, it does suggest that the actual number 
of kernicterus cases needed for more intensive testing to be cost- effective is relatively small, for 
example 0.49 cases per year if the TCB strategy could be delivered with 1000 meters up to 1.52 
cases per year if 9200 meters are required. This is the cut- off above which the total cost of TSB 
strategy is cheaper than TCB. It is important to remember that these values are based on strong 
assumptions (for the lifetime QALYs lost through kernicterus and the lifetime cost of kernicterus) 
that are supported by the GDG but are not based on externally verifiable evidence. The number 
of cases of kernicterus that could be prevented is the critical unknown. However, reports from 
the USA240 have shown a reduction of four cases per 100 000 births after the mid 1990s. 
Determining which intensive testing strategy is cost- effective depends crucially on the number 
of meters that would have to be purchased in order to deliver TCB. The number of community 
midwives involved in home visits on any one day is far smaller than the total number working 
in the NHS  at any one time. Therefore it seems plausible that the TCB strategy could be 
delivered with a number of transcutaneous meters that is sufficiently low to meet the threshold 
for cost-effectiveness. However, service delivery is not within the remit of this NICE guideline 
and local commissioners may want to opt for the strategy they believe can be delivered most 
cost-effectively in their area. 
 

 
165 
 Appendix D 
 Cost-effectiveness of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 
D.1 Introduction 
The clinical evidence suggests that babies with Rhesus and ABO haemolytic disease receiving 
IVIG are less likely to require exchange transfusion, an expensive procedure with ass ociated 
morbidity and mortality.241 However, IVIG is also a relatively expensive therapeutic intervention 
and there is a shortage of global supply. Therefore an economic evaluation was undertaken to 
help guide GDG recommendations. The analysis compared giving IVIG as an adjunct to 
phototherapy in babies with Rhe sus haemolytic disease and ABO haemolytic disease where 
serum bilirubin is continuing to rise at more than 8.5 micromol/litre per hour against not giving 
IVIG to these babies. 
D.2 Method 
A simple decision-analytic model was used to assess the cost- effectiveness of IVIG as an adjunct 
to multiple phototherapy in babies with haemolytic disease where bilirubin levels continue to 
rise. The structure of this model is shown in Figure D.1. Costs were taken from the perspective 
of the NHS and personal social services , which is in accordance with the NICE guidelines 
manual (www.nice.org.uk/guidelinesmanual). 237 The cost of multiple phototherapy was  n ot 
included in the analysis as it common to both treatment alternatives. However, the costs of 
exchange transfusion are important as the rationale for IVIG is that the rates of exchange 
transfusion will vary according to treatment. Naturally , the costs of IVIG are also an important 
cost input, as this is the treatment evaluated. 
Health outcomes are measured in quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). Exchange transfusion is 
associated with mortality and morbidity 241 and in this model the difference between the 
treatment alternatives in QALYs is assumed to only be a consequence of mortality arising from 
exchange transfusion. This was partly to simplify the analysis but also because any impact on 
QALYs from morbidity would be small relative to that from assuming causation between 
exchange transfusion and mortality. We assume  that IVIG would have no adverse effects  that 
would have important long-term morbidity. 
Figure D.1 Decision tree for the IVIG cost-effectiveness model 

Neonatal jaundice 
166 
D.3 Model parameters 
The treatment cost of IVIG was estimated using the unit costs in Table D.1. 
Table D.1 Unit costs for IVIG 
Resource Unit cost Source Notes 
IVIG £1,000 GDG estimate  
Specialty doctor per hour £54 PSSRU (2008)239 
(www.pssru.ac.uk/pdf/uc/uc2
008/uc2008.pdf) 
15 minutes set-up time 
Nurse, day ward, per hour of 
patient contact 
£43 PSSRU (2008)239 4 hours of nurse time 
Non-elective inpatient bed day  £430 NHS Reference Costs 
2007/08242 (currency code 
PB01Z) 
Inpatient cost estimated as an 
excess bed day for non-elective 
patient with a major neonatal 
diagnosis 
 
It takes 4 hours to administer IVIG and it was assumed that the drip was set up by a specialist 
registrar but that a nurse would supervise the treatment for the 4 hours. The treatment is 
provided as an inpatient procedure and therefore treatment also includes the resources involved 
in the occupation of a hospital bed. This was estimated by using the 2007/0 8 NHS Reference 
Costs242 excess bed-day cost for a non-elective inpatient with a major neonatal diagnosis. 
The cost of an exchange transfusion was estimated using the 2007/0 8 NHS Reference Costs and 
the category of non-elective inpatient with a major neonatal diagnosis. The costs of treatment 
are summarised in Table D.2. 
Table D.2 Treatment costs 
Resource Unit cost Source Notes 
Exchange transfusion £2,108 NHS Reference Costs 
2007/08242 (currency code 
PB01Z) 
Non-elective inpatient, with a major 
neonatal diagnosis 
IVIG £1,616  Based on the unit costs in Table D.1 
 
The efficacy of treatment relates  to the number needed to treat (NNT) with IVIG to avoid an 
exchange transfusion. This in turn influences the number of babies who avoid an exchange 
transfusion and its associated mortality. The clinical parameters used in the model are given in 
Table D.3. 
Table D.3 Clinical parameters 
Parameter Value Range (sensitivity analysis) Source 
NNT Rhesus disease 2 2 to 3 See Chapter 7 
NNT ABO Disease 5 5 to 13 See Chapter 7 
Exchange transfusion mortality 2% 0.3% to 2% Jackson (1997)204; Ip et al. (2004)243 
 
Finally, there is a range of cost–benefit inputs which reflect NICE methodology. These inputs are 
shown in Table  D.4. The QALY gain of an averted exchange transfusion death is an 
approximation of the discounted QALY gain from a life lived in perfect health and for an 
average life expectancy. 

Appendix D: Cost-effectiveness of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 
167 
Table D.4 Cost–benefit parameters 
Parameter Value Source Notes 
QALY gain from averted 
exchange transfusion mortality 
25  Approximately 75 to 80 years of 
life lived in full health 
Willingness to pay for a QALY £20,000 NICE guidelines manual 
(2009)237 
An advisory threshold of 
£20,000 to £30,000 is 
suggested in the manual 
Discount rate 3.5% NICE guidelines manual 
(2009)237 
 
 
D.4 Results 
The results with base -case values are shown in Table s D.5 and D. 6 for Rhe sus haemolytic 
disease and ABO haemolytic disease, respectively. 
Table D.5 C ost-effectiveness of IVIG for babies with Rhesus haemolytic disease with base -case 
model values 
Treatment Cost Mortality QALY loss ICER 
No IVIG £2,108 0.02 0.5 – 
IVIG £2,670 0.01 0.25 £2,248 per QALY 
Table D.6 C ost-effectiveness of IVIG for babies with ABO haemolytic disease with base case model 
values 
Treatment Cost Mortality QALY loss ICER 
No IVIG £2,108 0.02 0.5 – 
IVIG £3,302 0.016 0.4 £11,944 per QALY 
 
With base -case values , IVIG appears to be c ost-effective in babies with Rhe sus and ABO 
haemolytic disease with incremental c ost-effectiveness ratios (ICER s) of less than £20,000 per 
QALY. The treatment appears to be most cost -effective in babies with Rhesus haemolytic 
disease, which is because the data suggest a lower NNT to avoid an exchange transfusion. If 
more exchange transfusions are avoided, that has a beneficial effect on both ‘downstream’ costs 
and averted mortality. 
D.5 Sensitivity analysis 
The results for the base -case analysis a re only as reliable as the base -case inputs that produce 
them. There is important uncertainty in some of these inputs , especially with respect to 
exchange transfusion mortality and the NNT to avoid exchange transfusion. The 95% 
confidence intervals for the NNT were as follows: 
• Rhesus haemolytic disease: 1.6 to 3 
• ABO haemolytic disease: 3 to 13 
In exploring this uncertainty , there is limited value in exploring scenarios where exchange 
transfusion mortality is higher than the base case, the NNT is lower than the base case and the 
cost differential between exchange transfusion and IVIG is bigger than the base case. That is not 
to say that such scenarios are implausible but rather they would simply reinforce the observed 
cost-effectiveness of treatment. Rather, we are more interested in subjecting the cost-effectiveness 
finding to scrutiny by observing the extent to which the cost -effectiveness would still hold with 
the least propitious but still plausible scenarios. Therefore, the sensitivity analyses take a ‘worst-
case’ scenario with respect to clinical parameters and a threshold approach to costs. 

Neonatal jaundice 
168 
Analysis 1 – varying clinical parameters 
In this analysis it was assumed that the mortality rate for an exchange transfusion was 3 per  
1000.243 Furthermore, we took the upper limit of the 95% confidence intervals for the NNT. In 
this analysis the ICER for Rhe sus haemolytic disease was £ 34,379. For ABO haemolytic disease 
the ICER was £243,381. 
Analysis 2 – varying treatment costs 
In this sensitivity analysis the clinical parameters were maintained at their base- case value. The 
costs of IVIG were then increased to determine the  value at which IVIG treatment would no 
longer be cost-effective. For ABO haemolytic disease  IVIG treatment remained cost- effective for 
all IVIG treatment costs less than £2,421. For Rhesus haemolytic disease IVIG treatment would 
have to exceed £6,054 for it to no longer be considered cost-effective. 
D.6 Discussion 
This analysis strongly suggests that IVIG is a cost- effective treatment in babies with Rhe sus 
haemolytic disease as an adjunct to phototherapy where bilirubin levels are still rising. This 
finding seems reasonably robust with respect to uncertainty in model inputs. Even when the 
NNT was taken from the upper limit of the 95% confidence interval and much lower exchange 
transfusion mortality than the base case was assumed, the ICER was only just outs ide what 
would be considered cost- effective by NICE criteria. Also, with base -case clinical inputs the 
cost-effectiveness of IVIG in Rhesus disease babies was not sensitive to the costs of IVIG. 
For patients with ABO haemolytic disease the cost- effectiveness of IVIG is less certain because 
of the higher NNT. The cost -effectiveness in this group is very sensitive to exchange transfusion 
mortality and the NNT within plausible ranges. Whil e cost-effective in the base -case analysis, 
the ICER in the ‘worst- case’ scenario would not be considered to be a cost- effective use of 
scarce NHS resources. 
While the sensitivity analysis did not suggest that the results were particularly sensitive to 
changes in IVIG cost, it should be remembered that if the true clinical inputs conferred a lower 
benefit with IVIG treatment then the importance of treatment costs as a determinant of cost-
effectiveness would increase. 
D.7 Conclusion 
The model seems to provide good evidence that IVIG treatment in babies with Rhe sus 
haemolytic disease can be considered cost- effective and it therefore supports the GDG 
recommendation. IVIG treatment in babies with ABO haemolytic disease may also be cost-
effective, as indicated by the base -case results. However, sensitivity analysis suggested this 
finding is  subject to considerable uncertainty. Nevertheless, IVIG treatment in this group of 
patients is consistent with recent Department of Health guidance and is also likely to have a 
relatively small cost impact given the number of babies affected and therefore the GDG 
recommendation seems reasonable. Research to ascertain the cost- effectiveness of IVIG , 
especially in babies with ABO haemolytic disease , could be useful given the current evidence 
base. 
 

 
169 
 Appendix E 
 Implementation tools  
 BiliWheel  
Currently jaundice is recognised by visual inspections of the baby. The evidence reviewed in 
this guideline demonstrated that inspection of a baby by the parent, health visitor or midwife 
can determine the presence of jaundice in most cases , but it is not an accurate method for 
determining the severity of jaundice. Severity of jaundice is assessed by measurement of the 
bilirubin level (using a serum sample or a transcutaneous bilirubinometer). The clinical 
significance of the bilirubin level must be interpreted taking into account the baby’s age (in 
hours). Errors are easily made when calculating a baby’s age and this could lead to failure to 
recognise the need for treatment. For example, it is difficult to quickly and accurately mentally 
calculate the postnatal age of a baby whose bilirubin has just been measured at 6.30 am on a 
Monday and who was born at 7.45 pm on the previous Friday.  
The BiliWheel was inspired by discussions within the Guideline Development Group. It is a 
handy pocket-sized device (diameter 1 15 mm) comprised of three concentric wheels designed 
to help health visitors and community midwives determine the clinical significance of the 
bilirubin level by calculating a baby’s age in hours and relating this to the bilirubin level. It is 
similar in concept to the gestation wheel, with which midwives and community health visitors 
are familiar.  
Using the BiliWheel, the community health visitor or community midwife will be able to position 
the ‘0’ hour mark of the outer disk (which is 0– 168 hours) at the time/day of birth on the inner 
disk (divided into days and hours) and will then read the age in hours at the current time.  
Once the baby’s age has been determined, the health visitor or community midwife will 
interpret the baby’s bilirubin level using the data on the reverse side of the BiliWheel. The 
pointer on the second outer disk is rotated to the age (in hours) on the inner wheel. A window 
shows four threshold bilirubin levels corresponding to four stepped intervention based on 
treatment threshold adopted by the GDG:  
1. Repeat transcutaneous bilirubin/serum bilirubin measurement (6 – 12 hours) 
2. Consider phototherapy 
3. Phototherapy 
4. Exchange transfusion  
The GDG anticipates that the BiliWheel will: 
• prevent delays in treatment 
• reduce readmission rates for mothers and babies 
• raise awareness of key issues relating to the management of jaundice with community -based 
healthcare professionals 
• support implementation of the guideline. 
A prototype of the BiliWheel has been developed and a validation study is underway. The 
validation study will recruit practising and student midwives at two centres.. The primary 
outcome will be the accuracy of the BiliWheel in determining age in hours and correct 
intervention using six case vignettes. An iterative development and testing process will be used 
enabling feedback from each round of testing to inform the final design and additional content 
of the BiliWheel.  
If validated, a printable version of the BiliWheel will be available in pdf format for downloading 
from www.ncc-wch.org.uk following publication of the guideline.  

Neonatal jaundice 
170 
 Parent Information Factsheet 
The GDG have developed this parent information factsheet to accompany the guideline. The 
information included in this a ppendix is also being used by NICE as the basis for an 
implementation tool.  
 
Neonatal Jaundice Parent Information Factsheet  
What is jaundice? 
Jaundice is a common condition in newborn babies. Jaundice is caused by a build- up of a 
chemical in the blood called bilirubin. Newborn babies’ bodies are not developed enough to 
process bilirubin and remove it from the blood. Because of this more than half of all newborn 
babies become slightly jaundiced for a few days. Jaundice is usually noticeable to the eye 
because the build up of bilirubin causes the skin and the whites of the eyes and gums to appear 
yellow. In most babies jaundice is mild, causes no harm and clears up by itself. Nevertheless it 
is still important to contact your midwife or another health care professional if you think that 
your baby might have jaundice. 
How can I check my baby for jaundice? 
It is important to check your baby for any signs of yellow colouring particularly during the first 
week of life. The yellow colouring will usually appear around the face and forehead first and 
then spread to the body arms and legs. A good time to check your baby for jaundice is when 
you are changing their nappy or clothes. From time to time gently press your baby’s skin to see 
if you can see a yellow tinge developing. Check the whites of the eyes if they are open and 
when your baby cries have a look inside their mouth and see if the sides of the gums or roof of 
the mouth look yellow. Ask your midwife to show you how to check your baby for jaundice if 
you are not sure.  
What should I do if I think my baby has jaundice? 
• If you believe that your baby’s skin, gums or eyes are yellow on the first day of life, contact 
your midwife, on-call midwife or another healthcare professional urgently as this could be a 
sign of another medical problem. 
• If your baby is more than 24 hours old and you think that your baby’s skin, gums or eyes are 
yellow, contact your midwife, on-call midwife or another healthcare professional on the same 
day. 
It is also important to let your midwife, on- call midwife or another healthcare professional 
know:  
• If any of your other children needed treatment for jaundice as babies 
• If your baby was born at less than 38 weeks 
• How you are feeding or intending to feed your baby (breast/bottle/both)  
• If your baby passes pale, chalky coloured stools (poo) or dark urine (wee) that stains the nappy. 
How is jaundice diagnosed?  
If you or your midwife thinks your baby has jaundice then the level of bilirubin should be 
measured by a healthcare professional. The levels can be measured either by using a simple 
device (known as a transcutaneous bilirubinometer) that is placed on the baby’s forehead or chest 
and gives a reading, or by taking a blood sample, usually from the baby’s heel. It is important to 
monitor the level of bilirubin so a repeat test will often be required 6–12 hours later. 

Appendix E: Implementation tools 
171 
How is jaundice treated?  
Slightly elevated levels of bilirubin are not harmful but you may need additional support to 
establish breastfeeding. Ask your midwife to assist with this.  
If the level of bilirubin in your baby’s blood is found to be unusually high or continues to rise, 
then your baby may need to receive treatment in hospital. This treatment usually consists of 
light therapy or ‘phototherapy’. Phototherapy involves  placing the baby under a lamp which 
shines a special type of light (light in the blue spectrum) onto the skin. This light helps to break 
down the bilirubin so it can be removed from the body in urine. Phototherapy does not involve 
giving the baby medicine.  
Your baby will be placed under the light naked apart from a nappy. This is to make sure that the 
light can shine on as much of the skin as possible. During phototherapy your baby’s bilirubin 
levels will need to be measured every six hours.  
Your baby’s eyes will be protected from the light with eye pads or a Perspex eye shield. If the 
doctor is confident that the treatment is working and the bilirubin level is not too high, you will 
be encouraged to take your baby out for short breaks for feeds. 
If your baby’s bilirubin level is very high then more than one lamp will be used at the same 
time. In this situation the baby will need to remain under the light without breaks until the 
bilirubin level has dropped. 
Are there any complications of jaundice? 
Jaundice does not cause any problems in the majority of babies. In some rare cases the bilirubin 
level may become very high and this could result in a serious condition called kernicterus 
which can cause long term problems such as hearing loss and cerebral palsy.  
If your baby is at risk of kernicterus they will need to have a different type of emergency 
treatment in an intensive care unit. This emergency treatment is called an exchange transfusion. 
An exchange transfusion involves replacing the baby’s blood with new blood from a donor. 
Though neonatal jaundice is very common, kernicterus is extremely rare.  
What if my baby remains jaundiced? 
In most babies jaundice clears up within a few days. However if jaundice lasts more than two 
weeks (or more than three weeks in babies that were born premature) then it is called prolonged 
jaundice. If your baby has prolonged jaundice contact your midwife or another healthcare 
professional straight away because your baby may need some additional blood tests to ensure 
that there are no liver problems.  
Will my baby recover from jaundice? 
The outcome for a baby with jaundice is extremely good, as long as the jaundice is recognised 
before the levels get too high and it is treated appropriately.  
Where can I find out more information? 
NICE website: www.nice.org.uk 
Yellow Alert website: www.childliverdisease.org/education/yellowalert  
 

 
172 
 Appendix F 
 Registered stakeholder organisations 
This appendix includes a list of all registered stakeholders at the time of submission for factual 
accuracy check (2 February 2010.). The most current list of registered stakeholders is available 
on the NICE website. 
Abbott Laboratories Limited 
Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation Trust 
Association for Clinical Biochemistry 
Association of Breastfeeding Mothers 
Association of Clinical Biochemists, The 
Association of the British Pharmaceuticals Industry (ABPI) 
Birmingham Womens NHS Trust 
BLISS - the premature baby charity 
Bolton Council 
Breastfeeding Network, The 
Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals Trust 
Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals Trust 
British Dietetic Association 
British National Formulary (BNF) 
British Nuclear Medicine Society 
British Nuclear Medicine Society 
British Nuclear Medicine Society 
British Nuclear Medicine Society 
British Society for Haematology 
British Society of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition (BSPGHAN)  
Brook London 
Calderdale PCT 
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (Addenbrookes) 
Care Quality Commission (CQC) 
Central Medical Supplies Ltd 
Children's Liver Disease Foundation 
Cochrane Pregnancy & Childbirth Group 
Commission for Social Care Inspection 
Connecting for Health 
Countess of Chester Hospital NHS Foundation Trust 
Cytyc UK Limited 
Department for Communities and Local Government 
Department of Health 
Department of Health Advisory Committee on Antimicrobial Resistance and Healthcare 
Associated Infection (ARHAI) 
Department of Health, Social Services & Public Safety, Northern Ireland (DHSSPSNI)  
Derbyshire Mental Health Services NHS Trust 
Det Norske Veritas - NHSLA Schemes 
Diabetes UK 
Draeger Medical 
EGAOH 
Epsom & St Helier University Hospitals NHS Trust 
Evidence based Midwifery Network 
Gloucestershire PCT 

Appendix F: Registered stakeholder organisations 
173 
Harrogate and District NHS Foundation Trust 
Heart of England NHS Foundation Trust 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust 
Independent Midwives UK 
Insitute of Biomedical Science 
Inspiration Healthcare Ltd 
Institute of biomedical Science 
King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust 
Kingston Hospital NHS Trust 
La Leche League GB 
Leeds PCT 
Liverool Women's NHS Foundation Trust 
Liverpool Womens NHS Foundation Trust 
Luton & Dunstable Hospital NHS Foundation Trust 
Maternity Health Links 
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) 
Mid and West Regional Maternity Service Liasion Committe 
MIDIRS (Midwives Information & Resource Service) 
Ministry of Defence (MoD) 
National Childbirth Trust 
National Forum of LSA Midwifery Officers (UK) 
National Patient Safety Agency (NPSA) 
National Screening Committee 
Natus Medical Incorporated 
NCC - Cancer 
NCC - Mental Health 
NCC - National Clinical Guidance Centre (NCGC) 
NCC - Women & Children 
Neonatal & Paediatric Pharmacists Group (NPPG) 
Neonatal & Paediatric Pharmacists Group (NPPG) 
NETSCC, Health Technology Assessment 
Newham University Hospital NHS Trust 
NHS Bedfordshire 
NHS Bournemouth and Poole 
NHS Clinical Knowledge Summaries Service (SCHIN) 
NHS Direct 
NHS Isle of Wight 
NHS Islington 
NHS Kirklees 
NHS Plus 
NHS Quality Improvement Scotland 
NHS Sheffield 
NICE - CPHE 
NICE - Guidelines Coordinator - for info 
NICE - Guidelines HE for info 
NICE - IMPLEMENTATION CONSULTANT Region - East 
NICE - IMPLEMENTATION CONSULTANT - Region London/SE 
NICE - IMPLEMENTATION CONSULTANT Region NW & NE 
NICE - IMPLEMENTATION CONSULTANT Region West Midlands 
NICE - IMPLEMENTATION CO-ORDINATION for info 
NICE - Technical Appraisals (Interventional Procedures) FOR INFO 
North Tees and Hartlepool Acute Trust 
North Tees and Hartlepool Acute Trust 
North Tees and Hartlepool Acute Trust 
North Tees PCT 
North Trent Neonatal Network 
North West London Perinatal Network 
North Yorkshire and York PCT 

Neonatal jaundice 
174 
Northwick Park and St Mark's Hospitals NHS Trust 
Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust 
Oxford John Radcliffe NHS Trust 
Patients Council 
Pennine Acute Hospitals NHS Trust 
PERIGON Healthcare Ltd 
Philips Healthcare 
Public Health North East 
Public Wales NHS Trust 
Queen Mary's Hospital NHS Trust (Sidcup) 
RCM Consultant Midwives Group 
Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Trust 
Royal College of General Practitioners 
Royal College of Midwives 
Royal College of Midwives 
Royal College of Nursing 
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health 
Royal College of Pathologists 
Royal College of Physicians London 
Royal College of Radiologists 
Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust 
Royal Society of Medicine 
Salford Royal Hospitals Foundation NHS Trust 
Sandwell & West Birmingham Hospital NHS Trust 
Sandwell PCT 
Sandwell PCT 
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) 
Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust 
Sheffield PCT 
Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust 
Social Care Institute for Excellence (SCIE) 
Southampton University Hospitals NHS Trust 
St Richards Hospital 
UK National Screening Committee 
UNICEF Baby Friendly Initiative 
United Lincolnshire Hospitals NHS Trust 
University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust 
University of York 
Welsh Assembly Government 
Welsh Scientific Advisory Committee (WSAC) 
West Hertfordshire PCT & East and North Hertfordshire PCT 
West Midlands SHA 
Western Cheshire Primary Care Trust 
Western Health and Social Care Trust 
Wirral Hospital Acute Trust 
York NHS Foundation Trust 
Yorkshire and the Humber LSA 
 

 
175 
 Appendix G 
 Clinical questions 
I. Recognition 
Q1. What are the factors associated with an increased risk of hyperbilirubinaemia? 
Which factors affect the relationship between neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus or 
other adverse outcomes (neurodevelopmental, auditory)? 
Q2. What is the best method of recognising hyperbilirubinaemia? 
What is the accuracy of various tests (clinical history and examination, urine/stool examination, 
icterometer and transcutaneous bilirubin levels ) in recognising neonatal jaundice or 
hyperbilirubinaemia? 
II. Diagnosis 
Q3. What should be included in a formal assessment of a baby with neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? 
i) What are the elements of a formal assessment in a baby with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia?  
a) Clinical examination 
b) Total and split bilirubin 
c) Blood tests – blood grouping, G6PD levels, haematocrit, 
d) Urine tests 
e) Biochemical tests (bilirubin/albumin ratio, other relevant tests) 
ii) What is the clinical and cost-effectiveness of the tests carried out during formal assessment? 
Q4. How useful are the following tests in predicting neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
What is the accuracy of the following tests in predicting neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia?  
i) Umbilical cord blood bilirubin levels 
ii) Timed serum bilirubin levels 
iii) Transcutaneous bilirubin levels 
iv) End tidal CO levels Nomograms 
v) Risk assessment 
vi) Coombs’ test 
What is the effectiveness (clinical & cost) of various tests in predicting hyperbilirubinaemia and 
preventing morbidity/mortality? 
III. Management 
Q5. Phototherapy 
i) How effective is phototherapy? 
ii) What is the best modality of giving phototherapy (clinical and cost-effectiveness)? 
a) Conventional phototherapy (single, double or multiple phototherapy) 
b) Sunlight 
c) Fibreoptic phototherapy (biliblankets, bilibeds and other products) 

Neonatal jaundice 
176 
iii) What are the criteria/indications for starting and stopping phototherapy in babies with 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
iv) What is the correct procedure of giving phototherapy? 
Focus on the method of feeding/types of feed, incubator/bassinet care, effect of intermittent 
versus constant method on maternal–infant bonding, parental anxiety 
Q6. Is it beneficial to give additional fluids (cup feeds, fluids) during treatment with 
phototherapy? 
What is the effectiveness of nutritional support and/or rehydration during treatment with 
phototherapy in babies with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
a) Oral – top milk feeds by bottle/cup/spoon or other liquids (water/juice) 
b) Parenteral – IVF 
Q7. Exchange transfusion 
i) How effective is exchange transfusion? 
ii) What is the best method (single volume versus double volume exchange)? 
iii) What are the criteria/indications for carrying out an exchange transfusion?  
Q8. What are the other ways of treating hyperbilirubinaemia? Are they effective? 
What is the effectiveness of the following interventions in treating neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia/preventing kernicterus? 
a) Metalloporphyrins 
b) Gammaglobulins 
c) Drugs (phenobarbitol, clofibrate, cholestyramine) 
d) Agar, charcoal 
e) Suppositories, other rectal modes of treatment 
f) Complementary/alternative medicines (Chinese herbal remedies such as Yin-chen) 
IV. Monitoring and follow-up 
Q9. How to monitor a baby with jaundice? 
i) What are the appropriate criteria for monitoring (timing, frequency) of babies with jaundice 
who are at lower risk of developing neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia/kernicterus?  
ii) What are the appropriate criteria for monitoring (timing, frequency) of babies diagnosed with 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia who do not require immediate treatment?  
Q10. When to discharge a baby treated for hyperbilirubinaemia? What follow-up is 
required? 
i) What is the appropriate criterion for discharge of babies treated for neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? 
ii) What is the appropriate timing/frequency of follow-up? 
V. I nformation 
Q11. What information and support should be given to parents/carers of babies with 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
a) At the time of birth 
b) At the time of recognition of jaundice (FOR ALL BABIES) 
c) At the time of formal assessment/diagnosis 
d) During monitoring 
e) During treatment with phototherapy and other interventions 
f) At discharge and follow-up 

 
177 
 
Appendix H 
Evidence tables 
 
Table of Contents 
Which factors affect the relationship between neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus or other adverse outcomes (neurodevelopmental, auditory)?  1 78 
How useful are the following tests in predicting neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia?  193 
What is the best method of recognizing hyperbilirubinaemia? 220 
What should be included in a formal assessment of a baby with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 243 
Phototherapy 261 
Is it beneficial to give additional fluids (cup feeds, fluids) during treatment with phototherapy?  295 
How to monitor a baby with jaundice? 298 
When to discharge a baby treated for hyperbilirubinaemia? What follow-up is required? 298 
Exchange transfusion 300 
What are the other ways of treating hyperbilirubinaemia? Are they effective?  307 
What information and support should be given to parents/carers of babies with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia?  317 

Neonatal jaundice 
178 
Which factors affect the relationship between neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus or other adverse outcomes (neurodevelopmental, 
auditory)? 
 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Newman TB; 
 
Year: 2000 
 
Country: USA 
 
9 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Nested case- 
control study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Cohort of all infants with 
BW = 2000 g and GA = 36 weeks 
born alive at 11 hospitals of a 
health maintenance organisation 
during a two year period 
(n = 51 387) 
 
Cases: 
Babies with maximum TSB levels 
≥ 427 micromol/litre within the 
first 30 days after birth 
n = 73 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 67.1% 
Ethnicity: Not reported (only 
maternal race specified) 
 
 
Controls: 
Random sample of babies from the 
cohort with maximum TSB levels 
< 427 micromol/litre 
n = 423 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 54.4% 
Ethnicity: Not reported (only 
maternal race specified) 
 
For analyses examining the use of 
phototherapy only, additional 
random sample of 30 babies with 
maximum TSB levels of 342 to 
426 micromol/litre added to the 
control group 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
Not defined 
 
 
  
 
1) Relationship of clinical and 
demographic factors associated 
with hyperbilirubinaemia 
evaluated by bivariate analysis 
and OR 
 
2) Risk factors significant in the 
univariate model entered into 
multiple regression analysis to 
find independent predictors of 
hyperbilirubinaemia – both by 
including and excluding early 
jaundice cases 
 
Early jaundice cases (n = 14) 
defined as babies with TSB 
exceeding recommended 
phototherapy threshold for age 
during birth hospitalisation, 
those given phototherapy during 
birth hospitalisation, 
when jaundice noted at less than 
20 hours of age and TSB not 
measured within 6 hours of that 
time. 
 
3) Risk index developed by 
assigning points equal to the OR 
for risk factors that were 
significant in the logistic 
regression model with the 
exclusion of early jaundice cases, 
and predictive accuracy 
compared by the c-statistic 
(equal to area under ROC curve) 
 
Reference standard: 
Significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
defined as maximum TSB 
levels = 428 micromol/litre 
within the first 30 days after 
birth. 
 
 
Maternal and prenatal factors associated 
with significant hyperbilirubinaemia (those 
with P < 0.05 in bivariate analysis) 
 
Maternal factors 
 Race, 
 maternal age, 
 family history of jaundice in a 
newborn, 
 vacuum delivery 
 
Neonatal factors 
 Male sex, 
 lower GA, 
 early jaundice, 
 cephalohaematoma, 
 bruising, 
 breastfeeding at time of 
discharge 
 
Factors independently associated with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia from 
multivariate regression analysis (OR with 
95% CI) 
 
All cases (n = 73) 
 
Early jaundice: OR 7.3 (2.8–19) 
GA (per wk): OR 0.6 (0.4–0.7) 
Breastfeed only at discharge: OR 6.9 (2.7–
17.5) 
Asian race: OR 3.1 (1.5–6.3) 
Bruising: OR 3.5 (1.7–7.4) 
Cephalohaematoma: OR 3.2 (1.1–9.2) 
Maternal age ≥ 25 years: OR 2.6 (1.1–9.2) 
 
Cases excluding early jaundice (n = 59) 
 
GA (per wk): OR 0.6 (0.4–0.7) 
Breastfeed only at discharge: 5.7 (2.1–
15.5) 
Asian race: OR 3.5 (1.7–7.4) 
 
Unselected population but exclusion 
criteria not defined 
Confounding variables controlled for 
during multivariate analysis 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard test Blinding – 
Not reported 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
179 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
 
 
Bruising: OR 4.0 (1.8–8.8) 
Cephalohaematoma: OR 3.3 (1.1–10) 
Maternal age ≥ 25 years: OR 3.1 (1.2–8.1) 
Family history of jaundice: 6.0 (1.0–36.0); 
P = 0.05 
 
Risk Index scoring 
 
6 points each for exclusive breastfeeding 
and family HISTORY OF jaundice in a 
newborn, 
4 points each for bruising and Asian race, 
3 points each for cephalhematoma and 
maternal age ≥ 25 years, 
1 point for male sex, -2 points for black 
race, and 2(40-GA) 
 
Accuracy of Risk Index score in predicting 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Overall c-statistic 0.85 
 
Risk index score < 10 
+LR: 0.2 
 
Risk index score > 10 
+LR: 2.2 
 
Risk index score > 20 
+LR: 18.2 
 
Newman TB et al.; 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: USA 
 
10 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Nested case- 
control study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Cohort of all infants with 
BW = 2000 g and GA = 36 weeks 
born alive at 12 hospitals of a 
health maintenance organisation 
during a four year period 
(n = 105 384) 
 
Cases: Babies with maximum TSB 
levels = 428 micromol/litre within 
the first 30 days after birth 
(n = 140) 
 
Controls: Random sample of 
babies from the cohort with 
maximum TSB 
levels = 428 micromol/litre 
(n = 631) 
 
1) Frequency of jaundice noted 
in the medical record in term and 
near-term newborns less than 
24 hours old 
 
2) Association of jaundice noted 
in the first 24 hours after birth 
with the use of phototherapy and 
risk of developing 
hyperbilirubinaemia after 
controlling for confounding 
variables - 
 
 
 
 
1) Frequency of jaundice noted in 
newborns within 24 hours of age (Kaplan 
Meier survival estimates + no. with TSB 
measured) 
 
Less than 18 hours of age 
3.8% 
 
Less than 24 hours of age 
6.7% 
 
2) Association of jaundice noted within 
24 hours of age with risk factors (results of 
bivariate analysis) 
 
No statistically significant difference 
 
Nested case–control study 
 
Some cases were included in 42290 – 
should we excluded 42290 
 
Cases and controls taken from comparable 
populations but exclusion criteria not well 
defined 
Confounding variables controlled 
Methodology described adequately but 
exact number of babies with jaundice 
noted in first 24 hours calculated with 
Kaplan Meier analysis 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
180 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
Babies with conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
 
  
between the cases and the controls for risk 
factors ethnicity, sex, gestational age, 
breastfeeding, cephalhematoma or the birth 
cohorts 
 
Relationship between jaundice noted 
within 24 hours of birth and phototherapy/ 
hyperbilirubinaemia (Mantel–Haenszel OR 
with 95% CI) 
 
Phototherapy 
Cases: 18.9% 
Controls: 1.7% 
M-H OR 10.1 (4.2–24.4) 
 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
Cases: 14.3% 
Controls: 5.9% 
M-H OR 2.9 (1.6–5.2) 
 
 
Kuzniewicz MW et al.; 
 
Year: 2008 
 
Country: USA 
 
11 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Nested case- 
control study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Cohort of all babies with 
BW = 2000 g and GA = 34 weeks 
born alive at hospitals of a health 
maintenance organisation during a 
10 year period (n = 285 295). 
 
From this cohort 13 843 babies 
with qualifying TSB level of 291 
to 392 micromol/litre measured 
at = 48 hours of age taken as 
reference population 
 
Cases: Babies with maximum TSB 
levels = 427 micromol/litre after 
the qualifying TSB (n = 62) 
 
Mean BW: 3374 ± 527 g 
Mean GA: 38.3 + 1.7 weeks 
Mean age at entry: 
71.5 ± 19.4 hours 
Gender: Males = 58.9% 
Ethnicity: 
asian = 27.4% 
black = 8.1% 
 
 
 
Cases and controls matched on 
risk group status (low, medium 
and high risk based on the hour-
specific bilirubin centiles, 
gestational age and DAT results) 
and difference between their 
TSB levels and the TSB 
threshold levels for phototherapy 
as defined by the AAP 
 
1) Relationship of clinical and 
demographic factors associated 
with hyperbilirubinaemia 
evaluated by bivariate analysis 
 
2) Risk factors significant in the 
bivariate model (at P < 0.1) 
entered into multiple regression 
analysis to find independent 
predictors of hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
3) Predictive accuracy of the 
final risk factor model evaluated 
by the c-statistic (equal to area 
under ROC curve) 
 
 
 
1) Variables associated with severe 
hyperbilirubinaemia (those with P < 0.1 in 
bivariate analysis) 
 
Demographic factors 
When compared to 40+ weeks 
GA 38–39 weeks (P = 0.01) 
GA 34–37 weeks (P = 0.06) 
birth hospitalisation < 48 hours (P = 0.07) 
 
History & physical examination factors 
Bruising (P = 0.007) 
 
Laboratory values 
Qualifying TSB occurring during birth 
hospitalisation (P = 0.04) 
TSB increase ≥ 102 micromol/litre 
(P = 0.002) 
 
Interventions 
Inpatient phototherapy (p < 0.001) 
Intravenous fluids after qualifying TSB 
(P = 0.002) 
exclusive breastfeeding after qualifying 
TSB (P = 0.005) 
 
 
Nested case–control study Cases and 
controls taken from comparable 
populations with well defined exclusion 
criteria 
Confounding variables controlled 
Methodology described adequately 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
181 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
Controls: Randomly selected 
sample of babies with maximum 
TSB levels < 427 micromol/litre 
after the qualifying TSB (4 
controls per case, n = 248) 
 
Mean BW: 3414 ± 576 g 
Mean GA: 37.9 + 1.4 weeks 
Mean age at entry: 
73.1 ± 17.5 hours 
Gender: Males = 61.3% 
Ethnicity: 
asian = 29.8% 
black = 6.8% 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
infants with resolving jaundice, 
those where TSB levels not 
documented after a maximum TSB 
recording or decline in TSB not 
recorded, and those with 
conjugated bilirubin level = 2 
MG/DL  
 
 
2) Factors independently associated with 
severe hyperbilirubinaemia from 
multivariate regression analysis (adj OR 
with 95% CI) 
 
GA (compared to 40 weeks as reference) 
For 38–39 weeks: 3.1 (1.2–8.0); P = 0.02 
For 34–37 weeks: 3.7 (0.6–22.7); P = 0.15 
Family history of jaundice: 3.8 (0.9–15.7): 
P = 0.06 
Bruising on examination: 2.4 (1.2–4.8); 
P = 0.02 
Exclusive breastfeeding after qualifying 
TSB: 2.0 (1.03–4.0); P = 0.04 
TSB increase of = 102 micromol/litre per 
day: 2.5 (1.2–5.5); P = 0.02 
 
Accuracy of risk factor model in predicting 
severe hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
c-statistic 0.82 (0.76 to 0.88) 
 
 
Keren R et al.; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
12 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Retrospective 
cohort 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Infants with BW = 2000 g if 
GA = 36 weeks and BW = 2500 g 
if GA = 35 weeks participating in 
the hospital’s early discharge 
programme, and who had both pre 
and post-discharge TSB levels 
measured at the phase when ≥ 75% 
babies had both the samples 
(n = 899) 
 
Group 1: infants with post-
discharge TSB > 95th centile on 
nomogram 
 
n = 98 
mean BW: 3.4 ± 0.5 kg 
mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: males = 54.1% 
Ethnicity: 
White = 45.9% 
Black = 31.6% 
Asian = 10.2% 
 
1) Association of risk factors 
with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia derived 
from univariate analysis (at P 
< 0.2) 
 
2) Multivariate regression 
analysis used to find factors 
independently associated with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
To calculate risk, birthweight 
(kg) was transformed by 
subtracting 2 kg and dividing by 
0.5 kg for every 0.5 kg above 
2.5 kg 
 
3) Comparison of diagnostic 
accuracy of the risk factor score 
(derived from regression 
modeling) with that of pre-
discharge TSB levels in 
predicting significant 
 
Prevalence of significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
98/899 (10.9%) 
 
1) Factors associated with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Increased risk 
GA < 38 weeks (P = 0.02) 
GA ≥ 40 weeks (P = 0.12) 
large for gestational age babies (P = 0.13) 
higher pre-discharge TSB risk zone > 76th 
centile (P < 0.001) 
breastfeeding (P < 0.001) 
combined breast and bottle feeding 
(P = 0.02) 
maternal diabetes (P = 0.17) 
vacuum extraction (P < 0.001) 
prolonged rupture (P = 0.08) 
oxytocin use (P = 0.002) 
 
Retrospective cohort study 
Unselected population with well defined 
exclusion criteria 
Confounding variables controlled 
Methodology described adequately 
Blinding – not specified 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
182 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
Hispanic = 3.1% 
Other = 8.2% 
 
Group 2: infants with post-
discharge TSB < 95th centile on 
nomogram 
 
n = 801 
mean BW 3.3 ± 0.5 kg 
mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: males = 52.2% 
Ethnicity: 
White = 43.1% 
Black = 39.9% 
Asian = 7.7% 
Hispanic = 4.5% 
Other = 4.7% 
 
 
 
 
Exclusion: admission and 
treatment in intensive care nursery 
for neonatal illness and babies 
requiring phototherapy during 
birth hospitalisation. 
 
 
  
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Pre-discharge TSB levels 
expressed as risk zone on an 
hour-specific bilirubin 
nomogram 
(High risk > 95th centile, High 
intermediate risk 76th – 95th 
centile, Low intermediate risk 
40th – 75th centile, Low risk 0 – 
40th centile) 
 
Significant Hyperbilirubinaemia 
defined as TSB level > 95th 
centile on hour-specific 
nomogram. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decreased risk 
Small for gestational age (P = 0.04) 
Parity (P = 0.03) 
Caesarean section (P = 0.18) 
 
2) Factors independently associated with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia from 
multivariate regression analysis (OR with 
95% CI) 
 
Birthweight: 1.5 (1.2–1.9); P = 0.001 
GA < 38 weeks: 2.6 (1.5–4.5); P = 0.001 
Oxytocin: 2.0 (1.2–3.4); P = 0.005 
Vacuum delivery: 2.2 (1.5–3.6); P = 0.003 
Exclusive breastfeeding: 2.6 (1.5–4.5); P 
< 0.001 
Breast and bottle feeding: 2.3 (1.1–4.9); 
P = 0.03 
 
Clinical risk index scoring 
 
Birthweight: 
3 points for 2501–3000 g 
6 for 3001–3500 g 
9 for 3501–4000 g 
12 for 4001–4500 g 
15 for 4501–5000 g 
GA < 38 weeks: 5 points 
Oxytocin: 4 points 
Vacuum delivery: 4 points 
Exclusive breastfeeding: 5 points 
Breast and bottle feeding: 4 points 
 
3) Predictive accuracy for predicting 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
RISK FACTOR SCORE 
 
c-statistic 0.71 (0.66–0.76) 
 
Risk index score 0–7 
+LR: 0.1 
Risk index score 8–11 
+LR: 0.4 
Risk index score 12–15 
+LR: 0.9 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
183 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
Risk index score 16–19 
+LR: 2.0 
Risk index score 20–23 
+LR: 2.6 
Risk index score > 24 
+LR: 3.2 
 
PRE-DISCHARGE TSB 
 
c-statistic 0.83 (0.80–0.86) 
 
TSB centile 0–40th 
+LR: 0.05 
TSB centile 41–75th 
+LR: 0.2 
TSB centile 76–95th 
+LR: 2.2 
TSB centile > 95th 
+LR: 9.4 
 
 
Seidman DS et al.; 
 
Year: 1999 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Prospective cohort 
study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
 
 
Healthy full term infants with 
GA = 37 weeks born at two 
hospitals 
 
n = 1177 
mean BW 3247 ± 453 g 
mean GA 39.8 ± 1.3 weeks 
Gender: Males = 47.3% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
ABO or Rh incompatibility and a 
positive direct Coombs’ test 
G6PD deficiency. 
 
 
1) Association of various factors 
with jaundice derived from 
multiple regression analysis 
 
2) Comparison of diagnostic 
accuracy of various tests for 
predicting hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Test: 
TSB measured within first 8 to 
24 hours of life and repeated 
daily for the next 4 days 
 
Reference standard: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia defined as 
TSB 
> 171 micromol/litre at day 2 
> 239 micromol/litre at day 3 
> 291 micromol/litre at day 4–5 
 
Analysis: 
Association between various 
factors and jaundice calculated 
from multiple regression analysis 
 
1) Factors associated with jaundice after 
comparing Group 1 vs Group 2 (n = 1,177) 
 
Day 1 TSB (per 17 micromol/litre) 
OR: 3.1 (95% CI 2.4 to 4.1) 
 
Change in TSB from day 1 to day 2 (per 
17 micromol/litre) 
OR: 2.4 (95% CI 1.9 to 3.0) 
 
Maternal age (per year) 
OR: 1.1 (95% CI 1.0 to 1.2) 
 
Mat education (per year) 
OR: 0.8 (95% CI 0.7 to 0.9) 
 
Maternal blood type O 
OR: 2.9 (95% CI 1.5 to 5.8) 
 
Full breastfeeding 
OR: 0.4 (95% CI 0.2 to 0.9) 
 
Day 1 TSB > 85 micromol/litre 
OR: 36.5 (95% CI 15.9 to 83.6) 
 
 
Unselected population 
No differences at baseline between the two 
groups 
 
Test & Reference test described in detail 
Reference test a standard one 
Blinding – Not reported 
Confounding factors adjusted for during 
modelling 
 
Data not available to calculate PPV or 
NPV. Raw figures not available 

Neonatal jaundice 
184 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
using Odds ratios with 95% CI, 
and these factors used for 
modelling in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
 
 
2) Prediction of hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Prediction by Day 1 TSB only (threshold 
value > 85 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 63.1% 
Specificity: 94.2% 
 
Prediction by all model variables without 
Day 1 TSB 
Sensitivity: 57.9% 
Specificity: 90.4% 
 
Prediction by all model variables 
Sensitivity: 81.8% 
Specificity: 82.9% 
 
 
Keren R et al.; 
 
Year: 2008 
 
Country: USA 
 
14 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Prospective cohort 
study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Infants managed exclusively in the 
well infants nursery of an urban 
tertiary care hospital with 
GA = 36 weeks and BW = 2000 g 
or GA = 35 weeks and 
BW = 2500 g 
 
n = 812 
mean BW 3.3 ± 0.5 kg 
GA < 38 weeks: 13.4% 
Gender: males = 49.4% 
Ethnicity: 
White = 33.5% 
Black = 53.2% 
Asian = 9.8% 
Other = 3.4% 
 
Since the population in the area 
was predominantly black, stratified 
sampling scheme used to get a 
representative sample. 
Group 1: Infants with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 48) 
 
Group 2: Infants without 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
(n = 703) 
 
Exclusion: 
babies transferred to the intensive 
 
1) Factors associated with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
in univariate analysis entered 
into regression modeling for 
clinical risk factor model 
 
2) Comparison of diagnostic 
accuracy of three tests in 
predicting significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia by the c-
statistic (mathematically equal to 
area under ROC curve) 
 
Test 1: 
Pre-discharge bilirubin measured 
either by TcB or TSB at 
< 52 hours of age, and expressed 
as risk-zone on hour specific 
nomogram. 
Daily TcB levels recorded using 
BiliChek, and TSB performed if 
TcB above 75th centile on hour-
specific nomogram or TcB 
reading = 205 micromol/litre 
TSB value taken for analysis 
when both TcB and TSB done. 
 
Test 2: 
Clinical risk factors assessed by 
review of hospital charts for 
 
Prevalence of significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
48/751 (6.4%) – 61 had an incomplete 
follow-up 
 
1) Association of factors with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia (Univariate analysis) 
(n = 812) 
 
Factors increasing risk 
 
Pre-discharge bilirubin – 
high risk zone OR: 147 (95% CI 34–639) 
high-intermediate risk zone OR: 21 
(95% CI 4.9–93.0) 
GA < 38 weeks OR: 9.2 (95% CI 4.4–
19.0) 
intended breastfeeding OR: 2.2 (95% CI 
1.0–4.5) 
intended breast + bottle feeds OR: 3.7 
(95% CI 1.6–8.6) 
Grade 4 or higher degree of clinical 
jaundice OR 6.0 (95% CI 2.1 to 17) 
 
Factors decreasing risk 
Black race OR 0.43 )95% CI 0.23–0.80) 
Maternal history of smoking OR: Not 
reported 
 
 
Unselected population (stratified 
sampling) with well defined exclusion 
criteria 
Baseline characteristics of two groups not 
compared 
Confounding variables controlled 
Methodology described adequately 
Blinding – not specified 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
185 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
care nursery for any reason 
Babies who received intravenous 
antibiotics for concern for sepsis. 
 
 
  
maternal race, 
intended method of feeding, 
GA, 
history of previous infant with 
jaundice, 
clinical assessment of jaundice, 
G6PD deficiency. 
 
Test 3: 
Combination of pre-discharge 
bilirubin risk zone and clinical 
risk factors. 
 
Reference standard: 
Bilirubin levels (TcB or TSB) 
measured on day 3–5 on both 
hospitalised and discharged 
babies (at home) using similar 
method as in Test 1, and 
Significant Hyperbilirubinaemia 
defined as bilirubin levels 
exceeding or within 
17 micromol/litre of the hour-
specific phototherapy treatment 
thresholds. 
 
Factors significant in multivariate analysis 
model (P < 0.05) 
 
GA< 38 weeks OR 19 (95% CI 6.3- 56) 
Mother’s plan of exclusive breastfeeding: 
OR 3.7 (95% CI 1.1- 13) 
Black race: OR 0.22 (95% CI 0.08- 0.61) 
Grade 4 or higher jaundice observed 
clinically: OR 1.7 (95% CI 1.2–2.6) 
Female sex: OR 3.2 (95% CI 1.2–8.4) 
 
2) Predictive ability of the three tests in 
predicting significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
(multivariate regression) 
 
Test 1: Pre-discharge bilirubin risk zone 
c-statistic 0.88 (95% 0.85 to 0.91) 
 
Test 2: Clinical risk factors (final model 
had 5 factors – GA, intended method of 
feeding, black race, extent of jaundice and 
gender) 
c-statistic 0.91 (95% 0.86 to 0.97) 
 
Test 3: Combination model (pre-discharge 
risk zone + clinical factors of GA and % 
weight loss) 
c-statistic 0.96 (95% 0.93 to 0.98) 
 
Test 3 vs Test 1 
p-value for difference< 0.01 
 
Test 3 vs Test 2 
p-value for difference = 0.15 
 
Test 2 vs Test 1 
p-value for difference = 0.35 
 
Gale R; 
 
Year: 1990 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
15 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Nested case–
control study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
 
 
Term babies > 37 weeks delivered 
during a 5 year period in a 
university hospital (n = 10 122) 
 
Test group: 
Term babies who developed serum 
bilirubin 
levels = 221 micromol/litre 
n = 1154 
 
1) Association of various factors 
with high serum bilirubin levels 
by comparing test group with 
comparison group (univariate 
analysis) 
 
2) Step-wise regression analysis 
done to control for confounding 
variables 
 
1) Factors associated high bilirubin levels 
(at P < 0.01 during univariate analysis) 
 
Male sex (p =0.001) 
maternal diabetes (P = 0.01) 
maternal PIH (P = 0.005) 
previous sibling with hyperbilirubinaemia 
(P < 0.001) 
delivery by caesarean section (P < 0.001) 
vacuum or forceps delivery (P < 0.001) 
 
Cases and controls taken from comparable 
populations with exclusion criteria not 
well defined Confounding variables 
controlled 
Methodology not described adequately 
Blinding – not specified 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
186 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
 mean BW 3192 ± 508 g 
mean GA 39.3 ± 1.5 weeks 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Comparison group: 
every tenth admission randomly 
selected from the group of with 
serum bilirubin levels 
< 221 micromol/litre 
n = 1154 
mean BW 3257 ± 444 g 
mean GA 39.9 ± 1.35 weeks 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: Not defined 
 
 
 
 
epidural anaesthesia (P = 0.001) 
mother with blood type O (P < 0.001) 
first delivery (P < 0.001) 
cephalohaematoma (P = 0.003) 
short gestation (P = 0.01) 
lower birthweight (P = 0.01) 
lower birth order (P = 0.01) 
 
2) Factors independently associated with 
high TSB levels (adj OR with 95% CI) 
 
Maternal age > 35 years: Adj OR 1.7 
(95% CI 1.3–2.3) 
Male sex: Adj OR 1.4 (95% CI 1.2–1.7) 
Primipara: Adj OR2.7 (95% CI 2.1–3.5) 
Previous sibling with jaundice: Adj OR 2.3 
(95% CI 1.9–2.8) 
Early gestation (with 40 weeks as 
reference): 
For 37 weeks Adj OR 4.5 (95% CI 3.2–
6.3) 
For 38 weeks Adj OR 2.1 (95% CI 1.6–
2.8) 
Vacuum extraction: Adj OR 3.0 (95% CI 
2.1–4.4) 
 
 
Khoury MJ et al.; 
 
Year: 1988 
 
Country: USA 
 
16 
 
 
Study type: 
Retrospective 
study 
 
Evidence level: II 
 
Offspring of 1669 male US Army 
veterans who entered the Army 
between 1965 and 1971 and who 
participated in a nationwide study 
of veterans’ health (n = 3,301, 580 
sib-ships with one sibling, 1089 
sib-ships with two or more 
siblings) 
 
Exclusion: 
babies who had a different 
mother’s name from the rest of the 
sibling relationship (paternal half 
sibs), 
stillbirths, 
babies with records showing 
evidence of haemolytic disease of 
newborn. 
 
 
1) Univariate analysis to find 
association of maternal and 
infant variables with 
hyperbilirubinaemia (peak TSB 
levels = 205 micromol/litre) 
 
2) Multiple logistic regression 
analysis to find factors 
independently associated with 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
3) Recurrence risk of 
hyperbilirubinaemia by sibling 
order and degree of 
hyperbilirubinaemia in the first 
child before and after controlling 
for confounding variables 
 
TSB levels for degree of jaundice 
Mild: = 205 micromol/litre 
Moderate: 205 to 
 
Rate of hyperbilirubinaemia in first child 
of a sibling relationship 
 
83/1669 (5.0%) 
 
1) Association of factors with 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Preterm birth (GA< 37 weeks) (OR 2.2) 
black race (OR 0.37) 
breastfeeding (OR 2.1) 
neonatal asphyxia (OR 1.8) 
 
2) Factors independently associated with 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Year of birth (after 1975 vs before 1975): 
Adj OR1.49 (95% CI 1.03–2.15) 
Preterm birth (GA< 37weeks): Adj OR 2.4 
(95% CI 1.4–3.9) 
 
Retrospective study 
Selected population with well defined 
exclusion criteria 
Confounding variables controlled 
Methodology not described adequately 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
187 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
257 micromol/litre 
Severe: = 257 micromol/litre 
Breastfeeding: Adj OR 1.9 (95% CI 1.3–
2.7) 
1-minute Apgar score: Adj OR1.7 (95% CI 
1.0–2.9) 
 
3) Risk of recurrence of 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Unadjusted OR with 95% CI 
3.1 (1.4–6.8) 
 
Adjusted OR with 95% CI 
 
For Mild jaundice 
2.7 (1.8–4.1) 
 
For Moderate jaundice 
4.1 (1.5–10.8) 
 
For Severe jaundice 
12.5 (2.3–65.3) 
 
 
Beal AC et al.; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: USA 
 
18 
 
 
Study type: 
Cross-sectional 
survey 
 
Evidence level: III 
 
Mothers of babies with 
GA = 35 weeks discharged from 
well-baby nursery of a health 
system organisation during 
22 month period 
(n = 866) 
 
Exclusion: 
BW< 2000 g, 
GA< 35 weeks, 
babies who stayed = 3 days in an 
intensive care nursery, 
 babies with 
TSB = 171 micromol/litre in the 
first 24 hours. 
 
 
Maternal and neonatal data 
extracted from the organisation’s 
database and maternal race 
categorised into 7 categories – 
American Indian, Asian, African 
American or black, Hispanic, 
Middle Eastern or Arabic, 
Caucasian or white, and Others 
 
Computerised telephonic survey 
conducted to collect further 
information from mothers about 
their experience of breastfeeding, 
neonatal care, 
hyperbilirubinaemia detection, 
interventions and education, and 
racial ancestry for mother, father 
and newborn (allowing = 5 
responses for ancestry of each) 
 
 
Response rate 
 
Total eligible = 3021 
Contacted = 1248 
Completed survey = 866 
 
Agreement between Medical record 
documented maternal race vs Mother self-
reported race 
 
White: 64.1% 
Black: 69.6% 
Hispanic: 97% 
Middle Eastern: 50% 
Asian: 35% 
American Indian: 0% 
Others: 4.3% 
 
Relationship between newborn’s, mother’s 
and father’s first-named race for newborns 
reported to be = 2 races 
 
First-named race same for all = 40.9% 
Newborn and mother’s race same = 22.6% 
Newborn and father’s race same = 24.7% 
 
Population not representative 
Poor response rate 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
188 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
All 3 races different = 10.8% 
 
 
Murki S et al.; 
 
Year: 2001 
 
Country: India 
 
22 
 
Study type: 
Prospective study 
 
Evidence level: II 
 
Term (37 completed weeks) 
neonates with severe non-
haemolytic jaundice. The inclusion 
criteria were 
TSB > 308 micromol/litre, 
absence of hemolysis 
absence of major malformations. 
 
Kernicterus group: 
babies with stage II bilirubin 
encephalopathy characterised by 
presence of opisthotonus, rigidity 
and sun-setting of eyeballs 
n = 14 
mean BW 2402 ± 525 g 
mean GA 37.8 ± 0.8 weeks 
Gender: males = 71.4% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Non-kernicterus group: babies 
without features of bilirubin 
encephalopathy 
n = 50 
mean BW 2654 ± 446 g 
mean GA 38.1 ± 1.02 weeks 
Gender: males = 54% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Diagnosis of haemolysis was 
based on positive direct Coomb’s 
test, peripheral blood smear, 
reticulocyte count, plasma 
hemoglobin and packed cell 
volumes. 
 
Exchange transfusion was done 
whenever total serum bilirubin 
level reached 342 micromol/litre. 
 
 
 
Baseline comparison of two groups 
(kernicterus vs non-kernicterus group) 
 
Higher number of kernicterus infants 
delivered vaginally (93% vs 74%, P 
< 0.05) 
oxytocin use was higher in non-kernicterus 
group (26% vs 42%, P < 0.05) 
 
Neonatal risk factors 
 
No statistically significant difference (at P 
< 0.05) between the two groups for 
sex distribution 
mean gestational age 
mean birthweight 
% of small for date (SFD) 
history of birth asphyxia 
pH at admission 
weight loss 
 
Laboratory parameters 
 
Mean max TSB levels: 
Kernicterus: 542 ± 171 micromol/litre 
Non-kernicterus: 438 ± 79 micromol/litre 
P = 0.002 
 
Free bilirubin levels: 
Kernicterus: 25.5 ± 10.1 nmol/litre 
Non-kernicterus: 19.9 ± 6.9 nmol/litre 
P = 0.006 
 
Bilirubin/albumin ratio: 
Kernicterus: 0.14 ± 0.05 
Non-kernicterus: 0.11 ± 0.03 
P = 0.05 
 
Results from multiple logistic regression 
analysis 
 
History of birth asphyxia: 
 
Selected population with small sample size 
Comparison of baseline characteristics 
done 
Methodology not clearly explained 
Confounding variables controlled 
(partially) 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
189 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
OR 8.3 (95% CI 1.2–111.8); P = 0.03 
 
Maximum TSB levels: 
OR 1.15 (195% CI .04–1.3); P = 0.005 
 
Free bilirubin levels: 
OR 1.1 (95% CI 1.04–2.2); P = 0.009 
 
 
Turkel BS et al.; 
 
Year: 1980 
 
Country: USA 
 
21 
 
Study type: 
Retrospective 
matched-control 
study 
Evidence level: II 
 
All infants with kernicterus found 
at autopsy. 
32 infants identified with 
kernicterus matched to 32 control 
infants without kernicterus at 
autopsy born during the same year, 
of like gestational age, weight and 
length of survival. 
 
A second group of 13 pairs from 
the large group of 32 pairs were 
matched for sex as well. 
 
 
Multiple historical, clinical, and 
laboratory factors were 
compared, including 
therapy 
sepsis 
hypothermia 
asphyxia (Apgar score) 
haematocrit 
acidosis 
hypercarbia 
hypoxia 
hypoglycaemia 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
There were no statistically significant 
differences between the kernicteric and 
non-kernicteric infants for any of the 
factors, including peak total serum 
bilirubin levels. 
 
The multivariate analysis failed to 
determine a group of factors associated 
with increased risk for kernicterus.  
 
It was difficult to separate infants with and 
without kernicterus at autopsy on the basis 
of the clinical factors evaluated. 
 
Some cases of kernicterus may have been 
missed due to the variables of relying on 
identification in fixed or fresh brains. 
 
Bhutani VK et al.; 
 
Year:2006 
 
Country: USA 
 
20 
 
Study Type: 
Retrospective 
study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
125 of 142 cases of the Pilot 
Kernicterus Registry met the 
inclusion criteria. 
These babies were discharged as 
healthy and were included for 
analysis if they exhibited clinical 
signs of acute bilirubin 
encephalopathy regardless of total 
serum bilirubin levels.  
 
Main outcome measures were the 
comparison of 
etiology, severity and duration of 
extreme hyperbilirubinaemia 
(total serum bilirubin levels 
> 343 micromol/litre), 
response to interventions of 
intensive phototherapy and 
exchange transfusion, 
healthcare delivery experiences 
in preterm as compared with 
term infants. 
 
The total serum bilirubin levels, age at re-
hospitalisation, and birthweight 
distribution were similar for late preterm 
and term infants. 
 
Large for gestational age and late preterm 
infants disproportionately developed 
kernicterus as compared with those who 
were appropriate for gestational age and 
term. 
 
Clinical management of extreme of 
hyperbilirubinaemia, by the attending 
clinical providers, was not impacted or 
influenced by the gestational age, clinical 
signs, or risk assessment. This resulted in 
severe posticteric sequelae which was 
more severe and frequent in late preterm 
infants. 
 
 
Late preterm birth (340/7 to 366/7 weeks) 
of healthy babies was not recognised as a 
risk factor for hazardous 
hyperbilirubinaemia by clinical 
practitioners. 
 
Newman T 
 
Year: 1993 
 
 
Study Type: 
prospective cohort 
study 
 
 
The study population included first 
born white and black babies with 
birthweight = 2500 g who survived 
for at least 1 year and had at least 
 
Babies had TSB measured 
between 36 and 60 hours of age 
(as close to 48 hours as possible) 
and subsequent sampling was 
 
About 1% of the white babies (n = 21 375) 
had peak TSB level = 342 micromol/litre 
while the proportion among the black 
babies (n = 19 949) was 0.6%. 
 
Selected population 
Comparison of baseline characteristics 
done 
Confounding variables controlled 

Neonatal jaundice 
190 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
Country: USA 
 
 23 
Evidence Level: II one bilirubin level recorded 
 
n = 41 324 
Mean BW: 3285 g 
Mean GA: 39.3 ± 2.8 weeks 
Gender: males = 51.3% 
Ethnicity: 
White = 51.7% 
Black = 48.3% 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
Non-singleton babies 
Birthweight < 2500 or birthweight 
unknown 
 
done depending on the initial 
levels 
 
Outcomes 
intelligence quotient (IQ) 
assessment by psychologists 
(using Wechsler Intelligence 
Scale for Children) at the age of 
7 years, 
neurological examination by 
paediatric neurologists or 
specially trained paediatricians at 
the age of 7 years 
hearing evaluation performed at 
8 years of age using pure-tone 
audiometry 
 
Multiple logistic regression 
analysis was performed to 
control for the effect of 11 
potential confounding variables 
 
No statistically significant association was 
seen between high TSB levels and IQ 
scores or sensorineural hearing loss. 
 
Abnormal neurological examination was 
reported more commonly in children with 
high TSB levels (= 342 micromol/litre) 
compared to those with lower TSB levels, 
but the difference was statistically not 
significant (4.5% vs 3.8%; RR 1.2, 95% CI 
0.7–2.1). 
 
However it was observed that there was a 
significant linear increase in the risk of 
‘suspicious’ abnormal neurological 
examination with an increase in the TSB 
levels (OR 1.12, 95% CI 1.06- 1.2).  
Partially blinded (some tests) 
 
Boo NY et al.; 
 
Year:1994 
 
Country: Malaysia 
 
25 
 
Study Type: 
Cohort study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
136 jaundiced term neonates. 
 
n = 128 
Mean BW: 3022 + 474 g 
Mean GA: 39.8 + 0.7 weeks 
Gender: males = 62.5% 
Ethnicity: 
Malays = 50.8% 
Chinese = 35.9% 
Indian = 10.9% 
Others = 2.3% 
 
8 babies were excluded due to 
aminoglycoside treatment and 
congenital anomalies 
 
Hearing loss was based on brain 
stem-evoked response. 
 
Hyperbilirubinaemia defined as 
TSB > 340 micromol/litre 
 
Hearing loss: 
28/128 (21.8%) 
 
Hearing loss: 
TSB < 340 micromol/l 
13/83 (15.7%) 
TSB > 339 micromol/l 
15/45 (33.3%) 
P = 0.11 
 
Risk factors for hearing loss 
Severe jaundice which required exchange 
transfusion (P = 0.038) 
Earlier age of onset of hyperbilirubinaemia 
(P = 0.012) 
 
 
 
Oh W et al.; 
 
Year:2003 
 
Country: USA 
 
24 
 
Study Type: 
Retrospective 
cohort study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
Extremely low birthweight infants 
(401–1000 g) who survived to 
14 days of age 
 
n = 5630 
mean BW: 789 ± 136 g 
mean GA: 26.2 ± 2.1 weeks 
 
Demographic and clinical risk 
factors 
and serum bilirubin levels during 
the first 14 days were analysed 
with reference to death or 
adverse neurodevelopmental 
outcomes at 18 to 22 months’ 
postmenstrual age. 
 
3,246 infants survived at discharge, 79 
died 
after discharge, and 592 were lost to 
follow-up. 2575 of 3167 infants were seen 
in the follow-up clinics 
with a compliance rate of 81%. 
 
Logistic regression analysis 
 
PSB concentrations during the first 
2weeks of life are directly correlated with 
death or NDI, 
hearing impairment, and PDI < 70 in 
extremely low birthweight infants. 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
191 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Peak bilirubin levels that were 
recorded beyond the first 14 days 
of life were excluded. 
Neurodevelopmental variables 
were 
Psychomotor 
Developmental Index (PDI) < 70 
Mental Developmental 
Index (MDI) < 70 
moderate or severe cerebral 
palsy 
hearing impairment (hearing 
aids), 
composite category designated as 
neuro-developmental impairment 
(NDI). 
 
The NDI is defined as infants 
with any 1 or more of the 
following: 
PDI < 70, 
MDI < 70, 
moderate to severe cerebral palsy 
bilateral blindness, 
bilateral hearing impairment 
requiring amplification. 
showed that various demographic and 
clinical variables 
were associated with poor 
neurodevelopmental outcomes. 
After adjustment for these risk factor, 
significant 
association were found between peak TSB 
and 
death or NDI - OR 1.068 (95% CI 1.03–
1.11) 
PDI < 70 - OR1.057 (95% CI 1.00–1.12) 
hearing impairment requiring hearing aids 
OR 1138 (95% CI 1.00–1.30) 
 
There was no significant association 
between peak TSB and other variables 
 
Maisels MJ et al.; 
 
Year:2009 
 
Country: USA 
 
17 
 
 
Study Type: 
Retrospective 
nested- case–
control study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
From a cohort of 11 456 infants, 
75 infants who following 
discharge, had been readmitted 
with hyperbilirubinaemia (TSB 
> 291 micromol/litre) were 
compared with 75 matched 
controls. 
 
Hyperbilirubinaemia group 
n = 75 
mean BW: Not reported 
mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males 59% 
Ethnicity: 
White: 77% 
Asian: 12% 
Black: 1% 
Other: 10% 
 
Control group 
n = 75 
mean BW: Not reported 
mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males 52% 
 
Demographic and clinical risk 
factors and serum bilirubin levels 
were analysed in terms of 
readmittance for 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Factors include 
 
Maternal age 
Gestational age 
Ethnicity 
Mode of delivery 
Gender 
Feeding 
TCB percentile 
Bruising/cephalohaematoma 
Jaundice in 1st 24 hours 
Length of stay after birth 
. 
 
11.456 infants survived at discharge, 75 
were readmitted with TSB 
> 291 micromol/litre. 
 
The step-wise logistic regression analysis 
showed that various demographic and 
clinical variables were associated with 
readmission for hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
After adjustment for these risk factor, 
significant association were found between 
TSB > 291 micromol/litre 
and 
Gestation age 
35 to 36 6/7 weeks Adj OR 20.79 2.34, 
184.74) 
37 to 37 6/7 weeks Adj OR 14.86 (1.91, 
115.38) 
 
Feeding 
Breast only adj OR 10.75 (2.37, 48.82) 
 
TCB > 95%centile 
Adj OR 149.89 (20.41, > 999.99) 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
192 
Bibliographic details Study type and 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Methodology and interventions Results Reviewers Comments 
Ethnicity: 
White: 81% 
Asian: 7% 
Black: 7% 
Other: 5% 
 
Babies who received phototherapy 
prior to discharge were excluded 
 
. 
 
There was no significant association 
between peak TSB and other variables 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
193 
How useful are the following tests in predicting neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
 
Prediction of hyperbilirubinaemia (diagnostic accuracy) 
 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Knupfer M; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: Germany 
 
30 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Healthy babies with GA > 34 weeks 
cared for in a maternity ward of a 
University hospital. The study 
population divided into 3 groups: 
Group 1: Term appropriate for 
gestational age 
n = 1100 
mean GA 39.6 ± 1.1 weeks mean 
BW 3562 ± 418 g 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Group 2: Term small for 
gestational age 
n = 163 
mean GA 39.4 ± 1.2 weeks 
mean BW 2683 ± 274 g 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Group 3: Preterm 
n = 78 
mean GA 35.3 ± 0.8 weeks 
mean BW 2578 ± 437 g 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
discharge before 4th postnatal day, 
significant illness followed by special 
therapy such as antibiotics, CPAP or 
artificial ventilation 
 
Test: 
Umbilical cord blood bilirubin 
(UCB) measured within 2 hours of 
storage in amber 
 
Threshold values 
< 20 micromol/litre 
20–30 micromol/litre 
30–40 micromol/litre 
> 40 micromol/litre 
 
Reference standard: 
TcB from forehead every morning 
for 4 days and laboratory TSB 
performed if TcB index > 16. 
 
Diagnostic accuracy also calculated 
for predicting TSB levels requiring 
phototherapy 
 
 
 
 
Mean UCB (micromol/litre) 
Group 1: 32.4 ± 9.2 
Group 2: 31.7 ± 9.1 
Group 3: 30.9 ± 6.7 
 
Comparison of prevalence of 
hyperbilirubinaemia in Group 1, 2 and 3 (in 
%) 
 
With TSB > 250 micromol/litre 
10.6 vs 9.8 vs 25.6 
 
With TSB > 300 micromol/litre 
3.0 vs 3.1 vs 6.4 
 
Treated with phototherapy 
3.4 vs 10.4 vs 47.7 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of UCB (threshold > 
30 micromol/litre) in predicting TSB > 
300 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Prevalence: 33/1100 (3.0%) 
Sensitivity: 32/33 (97%) 
Specificity: 442/1067 (41.4%) 
PPV: 32/657 (4.9%) 
NPV: 442/443 (99.8%) 
 
Group 2: 
Prevalence: 5/163 (3.1%) 
Sensitivity: 5/5 (100%) 
Specificity: 70/158 (44.3%) 
PPV: 5/93 (5.4%) 
NPV: 70/70 (100%) 
 
Group 3: 
Prevalence: 5/78 (6.4%) 
Sensitivity: 5/5 (100%) 
Specificity: 32/73 (43.8%) 
 
Unselected population 
Test and Reference described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard one 
Blinding – Not reported 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
194 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
PPV: 5/46 (10.9%) 
NPV: 32/32 (100%) 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of UCB (threshold > 
30 micromol/litre) in predicting need for 
phototherapy 
Group 1: 
Prevalence: 40/1100 (3.6%) 
Sensitivity: 36/40 (90%) 
Specificity: 439/1060 (41.4%) 
PPV: 36/657 (5.5%) 
NPV: 439/443 (99.1%) 
 
Group 2: 
Prevalence: 17/163 (10.4%) 
Sensitivity: 16/17 (94.1%) 
Specificity: 69/146 (47.3%) 
PPV: 16/93 (17.2%) 
NPV: 69/70 (98.6%) 
 
Group 3: 
Prevalence: 37/78 (47.4%) 
Sensitivity: 26/37 (70.3%) 
Specificity: 21/41 (51.2%) 
PPV: 26/46 (56.5%) 
NPV: 21/32 (65.6%) 
 
Taksande A; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: 
India 
 
31 
 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
 
 
Healthy full term babies born in the 
hospital with GA > 37 weeks and 
absence of significant illness requiring 
NICU admission and any congenital 
malformation. 
 
n = 200 
mean GA 38.9 ± 2.07 weeks 
mean BW 2555 ± 442 g 
Gender: Males = 41% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
babies with ABO or Rh 
incompatibility, 
G6PD deficiency, 
those who later developed significant 
illness requiring NICU admission.  
 
Test: 
Umbilical cord blood bilirubin 
(UCB) measured at birth 
Threshold value 
> 34 micromol/litre 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB measured after 72 hours 
 
TSB > 290 micromol/litre taken as 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of UCB (threshold 
value > 2 mg% or 34 micromol/litre) for 
predicting TSB > 17 mg% or 
290 micromol/litre 
 
Prevalence: 19/200 (9.5%) 
Sensitivity: 17/19 (89.5%) 
Specificity: 154/181 (85.1%) 
PPV: 17/44 (38.6%) 
NPV: 154/156 (98.7%) 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test not 
described in detail 
Reference test is a standard one 
Blinding – yes 
 
 
Knudsen A; 
 
Study Type: 
 
Healthy term babies admitted to the 
 
Test: 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of UCB (threshold 
 
Unselected population 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
195 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Year: 1992 
 
Country: 
Denmark 
 
29 
 
 
 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
 
newborn nursery. 
 
n = 138 
median GA 40 weeks - range 38 to 43 
median BW 3495 g - range 2571 to 
4456 
Gender: Males = 52.2% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
preterm babies, 
sick babies 
Rhesus sensitisation. 
 
Umbilical cord blood bilirubin 
(UCB) measured at birth 
 
Threshold values: 
≥ 20 micromol/litre 
≥ 25 micromol/litre 
≥ 30 micromol/litre 
≥ 35 micromol/litre 
40 micromol/litre 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB measured on Day 3 
 
TSB ≥ 200 micromol/litre taken as 
value for hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
ROC curve used to find the best 
cut-off value of UCB. 
 
value > 35 micromol/litre) for predicting 
TSB > 200 micromol/litre 
 
Prevalence: 28/138 (20.3%) 
Sensitivity: 20/28 (71.4%) 
Specificity: 75/110 (68.2%) 
PPV: 20/55 (36.4%) 
NPV: 75/83 (90.4%) 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Reference test is a standard one 
Blinding – Not reported. 
 
Reported using Minolta JM to 
estimate TcB but no details 
given 
 
Carbonell X; 
 
Year: 2001 
 
Country: 
Spain 
 
26 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Healthy term babies 
 
n = 2004 – 610 in phase one + 1394 in 
phase 2, 
mean BW 3230 ± 491 g 
mean GA 39 weeks 
Gender: Males = 50.7% 
Ethnicity Not reported 
 
In first phase (n = 610), cord blood 
bilirubin (UCB) at birth and TcB with 
Minolta JM-102 measured at 24hrs, 
48 hours & 60–96 hours of life. 
Additionally TSB done for all at 60–
96 hours. On 169 babies TSB also 
measured at 24 & 48hrs 
 
In second phase (n = 1394), TcB and 
lab TSB values obtained to find 
accuracy of TSB and TcB at 24hrs 
and 48 hours to predict 
hyperbilirubinaemia. 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
290 micromol/litre = 2.9% in phase 1 
(18/610) and 3.25% in phase 2 
(46/1324) 
 
 
Test: 
1. Umbilical cord blood bilirubin 
(UCB) measured at birth (threshold 
value: ≥ 37 micromol/litre) 
ROC curve used to find the best 
cut-off value of UCB. 
 
2. TSB (in phase 1 & 2) and TcB 
(phase 1 only) measured at 
24 hours (threshold value for 
TSB = 102 micromol/litre and for 
TcB > 11) 
 
3. TSB and TcB (in phase 1 & 2) 
measured at 48 hours (threshold 
value for TSB = 154 micromol/litre 
and for TcB > 13) 
 
TcB reading using Minolta JM-102 
at the forehead and the sternum 
(mean of 3 measurements recorded 
at each site used for analysis) 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB measured on Day 3–4 
 
TSB = 290 micromol/litre taken as 
indicative of 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels for Sternal vs Forehead site (Pearson 
correlation coefficient) 
 
At < 24 hours (n = 120) 
Sternum Forehead 
0.81 0.77 
 
At 24–48 hours (n = 126) 
Sternum Forehead 
0.89 0.83 
 
At > 48 hours (n = 412) 
Sternum Forehead 
0.94 0.83 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB for detecting 
TSB > 222 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 98% 
Specificity: 72% 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for predicting 
TSB = 290 micromol/litre 
 
Prevalence of TSB = 290 micromol/litre 
2.9% in phase 1 (18/610) and 3.25% in 
 
Unselected population but no 
exclusion criterion 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Reference test a standard one 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – Not reported 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
196 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
phase 2 (46/1324) 
 
1. For UCB 
(threshold = 37 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 4/18 (22.2%) 
Specificity: 537/567 (94.7%) 
 
2. At 24 hours 
For TcB in phase 1 (threshold > 11 
Reflectance Units) 
Sensitivity: 15/18 (83.3%) 
Specificity: 368/556 (66.2%) 
PPV: 15/203 (7.4%) 
NPV: 368/371 (99.2%) 
 
For TSB in phase 1 
(threshold = 102 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 7/7 (100%) 
Specificity: 74/162 (45.7%) 
PPV: 7/95 (7.4%) 
NPV:74/74 (100%) 
 
For TSB in phase 2 
(threshold = 102 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 25/25 (100%) 
Specificity: 239/398 (60%) 
PPV: 25/95 (26.3%) 
NPV: 239/239 (100%) 
 
2. At 48 hours 
For TcB in phase 1 (threshold > 13 
reflectance units) 
Sensitivity: 17/18 (94.4%) 
Specificity: 288/556 (51.7%) 
PPV: 17/285 (5.9%) 
NPV: 288/289 (99.6%) 
 
For TcB in phase 2 (threshold > 13 
reflectance units) 
Sensitivity: 45/46 (97.8%) 
Specificity: 262/819 (32.0%) 
PPV: 45/602 (7.5%) 
NPV: 262/263 (99.6%) 
 
For TSB in phase 1 
(threshold = 154 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 11/11 (100%) 
Specificity: 102/158 (64.6%) 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
197 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
PPV: 11/67 (16.4%) 
NPV: 101/102 (100%) 
 
For TSB in phase 2 
(threshold = 154 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 45/46 (97.8%) 
Specificity: 348/774 (45%) 
PPV: 45/471 (9.5%) 
NPV: 348/349 (99.7%) 
 
Agarwal R; 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: 
India 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 1b 
 
 
 
 
 
All infants with GA > 35 weeks with 
no significant illness requiring NICU 
admission for > 12 hours, absence of 
any major congenital malformations 
and residing near hospital whose 
parents agreed to come for follow-up. 
 
n = 220 
mean GA 38 ± 1.4 weeks 
mean BW 2827 ± 459 g 
Gender: Males = 53.3% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
babies requiring NICU admission, 
Rh hemolysis.  
 
Test: 
TSB at 24 ± 6 hours after birth – 
three samples taken and mean of 
two closest values taken for 
analysis 
 
Threshold value: 
> 102 micromol/litre 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB measured on Day 5 when 
clinical jaundice 
> 171 micromol/litre 
 
TSB ≥ 290 micromol/litre taken as 
indicative of hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TSB (threshold 
value > 102 micromol/litre) for predicting 
TSB = 290 micromol/litre (n = 213) 
 
Prevalence: 22/213 (10.3%) 
Sensitivity: 21/22 (95.4%) 
Specificity: 135/191 (70.7%) 
PPV: 21/77 (27,3%) 
NPV: 135/136 (99.3%) 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Reference test a standard one 
Blinding – yes 
 
 
Alpay F; 
 
Year: 2000 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
28 
 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
 
 
All healthy full term newborn babies 
with GA = 38 weeks. 
 
n = 498 
mean GA Not reported 
mean BW Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
babies with blood groups A, AB, B 
and O/Rhesus blood factor 
incompatibility and a positive direct 
antiglobulin test result 
G6PD deficiency 
 
 
Test: 
TSB within first 24 hours (mean 
17.1 hours) 
 
ROC curve used for threshold 
value with highest sensitivity for 
predicting hyperbilirubinaemia 
(threshold 
value: = 102 micromol/litre) 
 
Results also given for threshold 
values = 120 micromol/litre 
and = 137 micromol/litre 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB measured at 24 hours interval 
for next 4 days 
 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TSB for predicting 
TSB = 290 micromol/litre (n = 498) 
 
Threshold value = 102 micromol/litre 
Prevalence: 60/498 (12.0%) 
Sensitivity: 54/60 (90%) 
Specificity: 286/438 (65.3%) 
PPV: 54/206 (26.2%) 
NPV: 286/292 (97.9%) 
 
Threshold value = 120 micromol/litre 
Sensitivity: 36/60 (60%) 
Specificity: 363/438 (82.9%) 
PPV: 36/111 (32.4%) 
NPV: 363/387 (97.8%) 
 
Threshold value = 137 micromol/litre 
Sensitivity: 21/60 (35%) 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Reference test a standard one 
Blinding – Not reported 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
198 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
TSB = 290 micromol/litre till Day 
5 taken as indicative of 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Specificity: 413/438 (94.3%) 
PPV: 21/46 (45.6%) 
NPV: 413/452 (91.4%) 
 
Seidman DS; 
 
Year: 1999 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
 
 
Healthy full term infants with 
GA = 37 weeks born at two hospitals 
 
n = 1177 
mean BW 3247 ± 453 g 
mean GA 39.8 ± 1.3 weeks 
Gender: Males = 47.3% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
 
Exclusion: 
ABO or Rh incompatibility and a 
positive direct Coombs’ test 
G6PD deficiency. 
 
 
1) Association of various factors 
with jaundice derived from 
multiple regression analysis 
 
2) Comparison of diagnostic 
accuracy of various tests for 
predicting hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Test: 
TSB measured within first 8 to 
24 hours of life and repeated daily 
for the next 4 days 
 
Reference standard: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia defined as 
TSB 
> 171 micromol/litre at day 2 
> 239 micromol/litre at day 3 
> 291 micromol/litre at day 4–5 
 
Analysis: 
Association between various 
factors and jaundice calculated 
from multiple regression analysis 
using Odds ratios with 95% CI, and 
these factors used for modelling in 
predicting hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
 
Factors associated with jaundice after 
comparing Group 1 vs Group 2 (n = 1177) 
 
Day 1 TSB (per 17 micromol/litre) 
OR: 3.1 (95% CI 2.4 to 4.1) 
 
Change in TSB from day 1 to day 2 (per 
17 micromol/litre) 
OR: 2.4 (95% CI 1.9 to 3.0) 
 
Maternal age (per year) 
OR: 1.1 (95% CI 1.0 to 1.2) 
 
Mat education (per year) 
OR: 0.8 (95% CI 0.7 to 0.9) 
 
Maternal blood type O 
OR: 2.9 (95% CI 1.5 to 5.8) 
 
Full breastfeeding 
OR: 0.4 (95% CI 0.2 to 0.9) 
 
Day 1 TSB > 85 micromol/litre 
OR: 36.5 (95% CI 15.9 to 83.6) 
 
Prediction of hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Prediction by Day 1 TSB only (threshold 
value > 85 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 63.1% 
Specificity: 94.2% 
 
Prediction by all model variables without 
Day 1 TSB 
Sensitivity: 57.9% 
Specificity: 90.4% 
 
Prediction by all model variables 
Sensitivity: 81.8% 
Specificity: 82.9% 
 
 
Unselected population 
No differences at baseline 
between the two groups 
 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Reference test a standard one 
Blinding – Not reported 
Confounding factors adjusted 
for during modelling 
 
Data not available to calculate 
PPV or NPV. Raw figures not 
available 
 
Stevenson DK; 
 
Study Type: 
 
Newborns with GA = 35 weeks as 
 
Test: 
 
Prevalence of hyperbilirubinaemia at 30 + 
 
Unselected population 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
199 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Year: 2001 
 
Country: USA 
 
32 
 
 
Diagnostic 
study/cohort 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
determined by best obstetric estimate 
and enrolled serially from 9 clinical 
sites (4 domestic and 5 international) 
within the first 36 hours of life. 
 
n = 1895 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 49% 
Ethnicity: 
Asian/Pacific Islander = 38.9% 
White = 33.1% 
Black = 16.4% 
Hispanic = 3.9% 
Other = 7.7% 
 
Exclusion: 
babies requiring admission to NICU, 
severe congenital anomalies, 
babies in incubators, 
pulmonary disease requiring oxygen 
or any form of ventilatory support, 
with BW < 850 g, 
and respiratory rates = 10 or = 100 
breaths/min. 
 
Babies with age-specific TSB = 95th 
centile either at < 24 hours, at 
30 ± 6 hours, at 24–84 hours or at 
96 ± 12 hours exited the study after 
giving test samples. 
Also babies with TSB < 40th centile 
at 96 ± 12 hours exited. 
1. End-tidal CO measurement 
corrected for inhaled CO (ETCOc) 
at 30 ± 6 hours (threshold value: 
value > population mean) 
 
2. TSB at 30 ± 6 hours (threshold 
value: TSB = 75th centile) 
 
Timing of various TSB 
measurements: 
a) at 30 ± 6 hours for all babies 
(Test) 
b) between 24 - 84 hours only on 
clinical grounds 
c) at 96 ± 12 hours for all babies 
d) till 168 hours as per study 
protocol 
 
Reference standard: Lab TSB 
confirmed hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Hyperbilirubinaemia was defined 
as Age-specific lab TSB = 95th 
centile 
 
Analysis: 
Logistic regression analysis models 
performed for prediction of 
hyperbilirubinaemia with ETCOc 
and TSB at 30 ± 6 hours using 
multiple variables (bruising, type of 
feeding, BW, race, maternal 
diabetes, type of labor, gender, 
infection, PIH, parity, maternal 
blood type and Rh status) 
 
6 hours and 96 + 12 hours 
120/1370 (8.8%) 
 
Comparison of ETCOc levels between 
Group 1 vs Group 2 (mean ± SD) 
1.45 ± 0.47 ppm vs 1.81 ± 0.59 ppm (P 
< 0.001) 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of ETCOc, TSB and 
combined test in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia - derived from ROC 
curves - (at 30 ± 6 hours) 
 
ETCOc (threshold > population mean) 
Sensitivity: 92/120 (76.7%) 
Specificity: 635/1250 (50.8%) 
PPV: 92/707 (13.0%) 
NPV: 635/663 (95.8%) 
 
TSB (threshold > 75th centile) after 
excluding babies with TSB > 95th centile at 
< 36 hours 
PPV: 16.7% 
NPV: 98.1% 
 
Combined test 
PPV: 6.4% 
NPV: 99.0% 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline data presented for 
total group 
 
(1370 (72.3%) completed the 
study) 
 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Reference test a standard one 
Blinding – Not reported 
Data not given for calculating 
TP, FP, FN, and TN. 
Confounding factors adjusted 
for during modelling 
 
 
 
Okuyama H; 
 
Year: 2001 
 
Country: 
Japan 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Full-term infants with GA = 37 weeks 
and BW = 2500 g. 
 
n = 51 
mean BW 3108 ± 327 g, mean GA 
 
Test: 
End-tidal CO measurement 
corrected for inhaled CO (ETCOc) 
every 6 hours during the first 
72 hours. (different threshold 
values at different age) 
 
Group 1 vs Group 2 
No statistical differences between the two 
groups for sex, GA, mode of delivery, 
Apgar score at 1 min, age at peak TcB, and 
feeding type. 
 
 
Unselected population but 
small sample size 
 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard test 

Neonatal jaundice 
200 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
33 
 
 
39.3 ± 1.4 weeks 
Gender: Males = 51% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
subjects with maternal smoking, 
infants of diabetic mother, haemolytic 
disease such as blood group 
incompatibilities, 
closed space haemorrhage, respiratory 
distress, polycythemia. 
 
  
 
Reference standard: TcB measured 
every 12 hours during the first 
5 days using JM-102, and serum 
TSB measured when TcB 
index = 22 reflectance units 
 
Hyperbilirubinaemia defined as 
TSB = 257 micromol/litre 
 
ROC curve used for predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia  
ETOCc levels 
At 6–36 hours – No statistical difference 
At 42, 48, 54 and 66 hours – levels 
significantly higher in Group 1 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of ETCOc in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Threshold 1.6 ppm at 36hrs 
Sensitivity: 5/7 (71.4%) 
Specificity: 27/44 (61.4%) 
PPV: 5/22 (22.7%) 
NPV: 27/29 (93.1%) 
 
Threshold 1.8 ppm at 42hrs 
Sensitivity: 6/7 (85.7%) 
Specificity: 35/44 (79.5%) 
PPV: 6/15 (40%) 
NPV: 35/36 (97.2%) 
 
Threshold 1.8 ppm at 48hrs 
Sensitivity: 6/7 (85.7%) 
Specificity: 32/44 (72.7%) 
PPV: 6/18 (33.3%) 
NPV: 32/33 (96.9%) 
 
Threshold 1.8 ppm at 60hrs 
Sensitivity: 6/7 (85.7%) 
Specificity: 29/44 (65.9%) 
PPV: 6/21 (28.6%) 
NPV: 29/33 (87.9%) 
but not done in all babies 
Blinding – Not reported 
 
 
 
Bhutani VK; 
 
Year: 1999 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
34 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Birth cohort 
Term (BW = 2000 g for = 36 weeks) 
and near-term appropriate for 
gestational age (BW = 2500 g for 
GA = 35 weeks) newborn babies in a 
tertiary hospital (n = 13 003) 
 
For nomogram 
n = 2840 
mean BW 3318 ± 457 g 
mean GA 38.7 ± 1.3 weeks mean 
age for pre-discharge sampling 
33.7 ± 14.6 hours 
Gender: Males = 50.1% 
 
 
Test: 
Pre-discharge TSB characterised by 
postnatal age in hours and 
measured between 18–72 hours 
 
Reference standard: 
Hour-specific nomogram or TSB 
centiles developed from pre and 
post-discharge TSB values. 
Post-discharge values obtained on 
clinical grounds from day 1–6. 
Data recorded in epochs of: 
4 hours for first 48 hours, 
12 hours for 48–96 hours, 
24 hours for age 5–7 days. 
 
 
Prevalence of significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Including both pre and post-discharge TSB 
 
230/2840 (8.1%) 
 
Post-discharge TSB only 
 
126/2840 (4.4%) 
 
Predictive ability of pre-discharge TSB 
percentile tracks as risk demarcators for 
subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 2840) 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard test as 
nomogram developed from lab 
TSB values 
Blinding – Not reported 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
201 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Ethnicity: 
White = 43.4% 
Black = 41.2% 
Hispanic = 3.6% 
Asian = 4.1% 
Other = 7.7% 
 
 
 
Exclusion: 
admission and treatment in intensive 
care nursery for neonatal illness, 
positive Coombs’ test, 
TSB measured after initiation of 
phototherapy, 
babies requiring phototherapy before 
60 hours to control unexplained 
rapidly rising TSB levels. 
 
 
  
Predictive ability of pre-discharge 
TSB levels (given as percentile 
tracks and risk zones) evaluated for 
subsequent Significant 
Hyperbilirubinaemia (defined as 
TSB level reaching into the high-
risk zone or = 95th centile) 
 
Threshold zones: 
High risk zone above 95th 
percentile, 
High intermediate risk zone 
between 75th and 95th centile, 
Low intermediate risk zone 
between 75th and 40th centile 
Low risk zone below 40th centile 
 
 
Pre-discharge TSB above 95th percentile 
(n = 172) 
Sensitivity: 68/126 (54.0%) 
Specificity: 2610/2714 (96.2%) 
PPV: 68/172 (39.5%) 
NPV: 2610/2668 (97.8%) 
 
Pre-discharge TSB above 75th percentile 
(n = 528) 
Sensitivity: 114/126 (90.5%) 
Specificity: 2300/2714 (84.7%) 
PPV: 114/528 (21.6%) 
NPV: 2300/2312 (99.5%) 
 
Pre-discharge TSB above 40th percentile 
(n = 1084) 
Sensitivity: 126/126 (100%) 
Specificity: 1756/2714 (64.7%) 
PPV: 126/1084 (11.6%) 
NPV: 1756/1756 (100%) 
 
Likelihood ratio (LR) based on risk zones 
 
High risk zone 
+LR: 14.1 
 
Upper-intermediate risk zone 
+LR: 3.2 
 
Lower-intermediate risk zone 
+LR: 0.5 
 
Low risk zone 
+LR: 0 
 
 
Romagnoli C; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: Italy 
 
37 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Phase 1: Development of nomogram 
Full term appropriate for gestational 
age babies delivered by vaginal or 
caesarean section after uneventful 
pregnancy, without asphyxia and with 
no Rh or major ABO incompatibility. 
 
n = 438 
mean BW 3389 ± 668 g 
 
Test: 
Laboratory TSB measured between 
30–72 hours on clinical suspicion 
(single measurement in all babies, 
two consecutive TSB 
determinations 12 hours apart in 
514/1244 babies in Hospital A and 
175/498 babies in Hospital B) 
 
Reference standard: 
 
Phase 1: Time of reaching highest TSB 
values in Phase 1 
 
At 24–48 hours: 20.3% 
At 49–72 hours: 48.4% 
At 73–96 hours: 26.0% 
At 97–120 hours: 5.3% 
 
 
Phase 2: Predictive ability of Trend 12 and 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard test as 
nomogram developed from lab 
TSB values 
Blinding – Not reported 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
202 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
mean GA 40 ± 1.8 weeks 
Gender: Males = 51.6% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
congenital anomalies, 
any illness requiring admission to 
neonatal intensive care unit, 
infants with delayed meconium 
passage, 
hypothermia, 
hypoglycaemia, cephalohematoma, 
local bleeding, 
hemorrhagic disease of newborn, 
UTI or suspected clinical sepsis. 
 
 
 
Phase 2: Application of the 
nomogram 
Healthy term babies in two hospitals 
who had TSB estimation between 30–
72 hours due to clinical jaundice 
 
 
Hospital A: 
n = 1244, 
mean BW 3299 ± 447 g, 
mean GA 39.2 ± 1.4 weeks 
Gender: Males = 56.4% 
ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Hospital B: 
n = 498, 
mean BW 3312 ± 394 g, 
mean GA 39.5 ± 1.3 weeks 
Gender: Males = 51.8% 
ethnicity: Not reported 
 
  
Hour-specific nomogram. TSB 
curves developed from TSB values 
measured at 6 hours of age and 
then every 4–6 hours during day 
and 6–12 hours during night. 
Curves of babies with TSB 
> 205 micromol/litre and those 
with TSB > 205 micromol/litre 
taken separately, their 1st 
percentile TSB values determined 
for each hour of life and connected 
to form percentile tracks. 
 
Predictive ability of TSB levels 
measured in Phase 2 evaluated for 
subsequent hyperbilirubinaemia at 
24–36 hours, 37–48 hours, 49–
60 hours, 61–72 hours and all 
together 
(threshold value – 
Trend 12 defined as TSB value 
exceeding the 1st percentile track 
of babies with TSB 
> 205 micromol/litre, and Trend 15 
defined as TSB value exceeding the 
1st percentile track of babies with 
TSB > 256 micromol/litre 
 
 
15 as risk demarcators for subsequent 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
HOSPITAL A 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 205 micromol/litre 
230/1244 (18.5%) 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 205 micromol/litre 
100/1244 (8.0%) 
 
Single TSB measurement with Trend 12 as 
threshold 
Sensitivity: 228/230 (99.1%) 
Specificity: 496/1014 (48.9%) 
PPV: 228/746 (30.6%) 
NPV: 496/498 (99.6%) 
+ LR: 1.9 
 
Single TSB measurement with Trend 15 as 
threshold 
Sensitivity: 100/100 (100%) 
Specificity: 859/1144 (75.1%) 
PPV: 100/385 (26.0%) 
NPV: 859/859 (100%) 
+LR: 4.0 
 
Two TSB measurements with Trend 12 as 
threshold 
Sensitivity: 85/85 (100%) 
Specificity: 217/429 (50.6%) 
PPV: 85/302 (28.6%) 
NPV: 217/217 (100%) 
+LR: 2.0 
 
Two TSB measurements with Trend 15 as 
threshold 
Sensitivity: 92/92 (100%) 
Specificity: 355/422 (84.1%) 
PPV: 92/159 (57.9%) 
NPV: 355/355 (100%) 
+LR: 6.3 
 
HOSPITAL B 
Prevalence of TSB > 12 MG/DL 
129/498 (25.9%) 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
203 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Prevalence of TSB > 15 MG/DL 
59/498 (11.8%) 
 
Single TSB measurement with Trend 12 as 
threshold 
Sensitivity: 127/129 (98.4%) 
Specificity: 131/369 (35.5%) 
PPV: 127/365 (34.8%) 
NPV: 131/133 (98.5%) 
+ LR: 1.5 
 
Single TSB measurement with Trend 15 as 
threshold 
Sensitivity: 52/59 (88.1%) 
Specificity: 344/439 (78.4%) 
PPV: 52/147 (35.4%) 
NPV: 344/351 (98.0%) 
+LR: 4.1 
 
Two TSB measurements with Trend 12 as 
threshold 
Sensitivity: 54/54 (100%) 
Specificity: 84/121 (69.4%) 
PPV: 54/91 (59.3%) 
NPV: 84/84 (100%) 
+LR: 3.3 
 
Two TSB measurements with Trend 15 as 
threshold 
Sensitivity: 23/24 (95.8%) 
Specificity: 117/151 (77.5%) 
PPV: 23/58 (40.4%) 
NPV: 117/118 (99.2%) 
+LR: 4.3 
 
 
Bhutani VK; 
 
Year: 2000 
 
Country: USA 
 
36 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 1b 
 
 
 
All term and near-term babies 
(either = 36 weeks GA and 
BW = 2000 g or = 35 weeks and 
BW = 2500 g) discharged as healthy 
from the well-baby nursery in a 
tertiary hospital 
 
n = 490, 
observations=1788, 
mean BW 3404 ± 518 g, 
mean GA 38. 9 ± 1.5 weeks 
 
Test: 
Pre-discharge TcB reading from the 
forehead using BiliChek measured 
between 24 and 72 hours of age. 
 
Reference standard: 
Laboratory TSB measured at same 
time as TcB, and also sent for 
HPLC assays. 
 
Paired TcB and HPLC TSB values 
plotted on the hour-specific 
 
Prevalence of significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
30/490 (6.1%) 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with TSB levels 
using HPLC (Pearson correlation 
coefficient, n = 1788 samples) 
r = 0.91, P < 0.01 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between TSB and TcB 
MD = -8 micromol/litre (95% CI -38.9 to 
 
Unselected population but only 
1.1% of study population had 
TSB values 
> 256 micromol/litre 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard test as 
nomogram developed from lab 
TSB values 
Blinding – specified 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
204 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity: 
White = 59.1% 
Black = 29.5% 
Hispanic = 3.5% 
Asian = 4.5% 
Others = 3.5% 
 
Exclusion: 
clinical manifestation of sepsis, heart 
or circulatory disease, 
respiratory distress, 
clinical evidence of 
haemoglobinopathy, 
initiation of phototherapy. 
 
nomogram. 
 
Predictive ability of pre-discharge 
TcB levels (threshold = 75th 
centile) evaluated for subsequent 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
(defined as TSB = 95th centile or in 
the high-risk zone on the hour-
specific nomogram) 
 
54.9) 
 
Predictive ability of pre-discharge TcB 
(threshold = 75th centile) for significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 419) 
 
Sensitivity: 23/23 (100%) 
Specificity: 349/396 
(88.1%) 
PPV: 23/70 (32.9%) 
NPV: 349/349 (100%) 
+LR: 8.4 
 
Newman TB; 
 
Year: 2000 
 
Country: USA 
 
9 
 
 
 
Study Type: Nested 
case- control study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Cohort of all infants with 
BW = 2000 g and GA = 36 weeks 
born alive at 11 hospitals of a health 
maintenance organisation during a 
two year period (n = 51 387) 
 
Cases: 
Babies with maximum TSB 
levels = 428 micromol/litre within the 
first 30 days after birth 
n = 73 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 67.1% 
Ethnicity: Not reported (only maternal 
race specified) 
 
 
Controls: 
Random sample of babies from the 
cohort with maximum TSB 
levels = 428 micromol/litre 
n = 423 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 54.4% 
Ethnicity: Not reported (only maternal 
race specified) 
 
For analyses examining the use of 
 
1) Relationship of clinical and 
demographic factors associated 
with hyperbilirubinaemia evaluated 
by bivariate analysis and OR 
 
2) Risk factors significant in the 
univariate model entered into 
multiple regression analysis to find 
independent predictors of 
hyperbilirubinaemia – both by 
including and excluding early 
jaundice cases 
 
Early jaundice cases (n = 14) 
defined as babies with TSB 
exceeding recommended 
phototherapy threshold for age 
during birth hospitalisation, 
those given phototherapy during 
birth hospitalisation, 
when jaundice noted at less than 
20 hours of age and TSB not 
measured within 6 hours of that 
time. 
 
3) Risk index developed by 
assigning points equal to the OR 
for risk factors that were significant 
in the logistic regression model 
with the exclusion of early jaundice 
 
Maternal and prenatal factors associated 
with significant hyperbilirubinaemia (those 
with P < 0.05 in bivariate analysis) 
 
Maternal factors 
 Race, 
 maternal age, 
 family HISTORY OF jaundice in 
a newborn, 
 vacuum delivery 
 
Neonatal factors 
 Male sex, 
 lower GA, 
 early jaundice, 
 cephalohaematoma, 
 bruising, 
 breastfeeding at time of 
discharge 
 
Factors independently associated with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia from 
multivariate regression analysis (OR with 
95% CI) 
 
All cases (n = 73) 
 
Early jaundice: OR 7.3 (2.8–19) 
GA (per wk): OR 0.6 (0.4–0.7) 
 
Unselected population but 
exclusion criteria not defined 
Confounding variables 
controlled for during 
multivariate analysis 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard test 
Blinding – Not reported 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
205 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
phototherapy only, additional random 
sample of 30 babies with maximum 
TSB levels of 342 to 
426 micromol/litre added to the 
control group 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
Not defined 
 
 
  
cases, and predictive accuracy 
compared by the c-statistic (equal 
to area under ROC curve) 
 
Reference standard: 
Significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
defined as maximum TSB 
levels = 428 micromol/litre within 
the first 30 days after birth. 
 
 
 
Breastfeed only at discharge: OR 6.9 (2.7–
17.5) 
Asian race: OR 3.1 (1.5–6.3) 
Bruising: OR 3.5 (1.7–7.4) 
Cephalohaematoma: OR 3.2 (1.1–9.2) 
Maternal age ≥ 25 years: OR 2.6 (1.1–9.2) 
 
Cases excluding early jaundice (n = 59) 
 
GA (per wk): OR 0.6 (0.4–0.7) 
Breastfeed only at discharge: 5.7 (2.1–15.5) 
Asian race: OR 3.5 (1.7–7.4) 
Bruising: OR 4.0 (1.8–8.8) 
Cephalohaematoma: OR 3.3 (1.1–10) 
Maternal age ≥ 25 years: OR 3.1 (1.2–8.1) 
 
Risk Index scoring 
 
6 points each for exclusive breastfeeding 
and family HISTORY OF jaundice in a 
newborn, 
4 points each for bruising and Asian race, 
3 points each for cephalhematoma and 
maternal age ≥ 25 years, 
1 point for male sex, -2 points for black 
race, and 2(40-GA) 
 
Accuracy of Risk Index score in predicting 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Overall c-statistic 0.85 
 
Risk index score < 10 
+LR: 0.2 
 
Risk index score > 10 
+LR: 2.2 
 
Risk index score > 20 
+LR: 18.2 
 
Newman TB; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: USA 
 
35 
 
Study Type: 1) 
Nested case- control 
study 
2) Retrospective 
cohort 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
Study 1: 
Cohort of all infants with 
BW = 2000 g and GA = 36 weeks 
born alive at 11 hospitals of a health 
maintenance organisation during a 
two year period (n = 53 997) 
 
 
Study 1: 
Risk index score developed by 
assigning points equal to the OR 
for risk factors significant in the 
logistic regression model (not 
including family history of 
jaundice) with the exclusion of 
 
Study 1: 
Comparison of 1995–96 cohort (n = 51 387) 
with 1997–98 cohort (n = 53 997) 
 
No difference regarding % of babies with 
TSB level ≥ 342 micromol/litre, 
TSB ≥ 428 micromol/litre, 
 
Retrospective cohort study 
Unselected population but 
exclusion criteria not defined 
Confounding variables 
controlled for during 
multivariate analysis 
Test & Reference test described 

Neonatal jaundice 
206 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
 
 
 
Cases: Babies with maximum TSB 
levels = 428 micromol/litre within the 
first 30 days after birth (n = 67) 
Controls: Random sample of babies 
from the cohort with maximum TSB 
levels = 428 micromol/litre (n = 208) 
 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Study 2: 
All infants with BW = 2000 g and 
GA = 36 weeks born alive at 11 
hospitals of a health maintenance 
organisation during a four year period, 
and who had TSB measured at 
< 48 hours of age (n = 5706) 
 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
Babies developing TSB levels 
> 342 micromol/litre at < 48 hours 
 
 
  
early jaundice cases. 
 
Predictive accuracy compared by 
the c-statistic (equal to area under 
ROC curve) 
 
Study 2: 
Test 1 
Partial clinical risk index derived 
from Risk index in Study 1 by 
deleting factors family history of 
jaundice, breastfeeding, bruising 
and by substituting scalp injury in 
medical records with 
cephalohaematoma. 
 
Test 2 
TSB levels measured at < 48 hours 
and classified into 4 age-specific 
percentile groups 
< 40th centile, 
40th to < 75th centile, 
75th to < 95th centile, 
> 95th centile). 
 
The data was then transformed into 
hour-specific z scores 
 
Reference standard 
Significant Hyperbilirubinaemia 
defined as maximum TSB 
levels = 342 micromol/litre 
 
 
 
 
age more than 7 days at the time of highest 
TSB levels, 
average number of TSB tests per patient, 
length of hospitalisation stay 
and treatment with phototherapy 
 
Accuracy of Modified risk index score (with 
exclusion of family HISTORY OF jaundice) 
in predicting significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
(with 95% CI) 
 
1997–1998 cohort 
c-statistic 0.83 (95% CI 0.77 to 0.89) 
 
1995–96 cohort 
c-statistic 0.84 (95% CI 0.79 to 0.89) 
 
Study 2: 
Prevalence of hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
230/5,706 (4.7%) 
 
Risk of developing TSB levels > 
342 micromol/litre based on TSB percentile 
group 
 
< 40th centile = 0.5 
40th to < 75th centile = 0.7 
75th to < 95th centile = 3.3 
 ≥ 95th centile = 13.8 
 
Accuracy of tests in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia (TSB 
levels = 342 micromol/litre 
 
Partial risk index score 
c-statistic 0.69 
 
TSB centile group 
c-statistic 0.79 
 
TSB z score 
c-statistic 0.83 
 
TSB z score + Partial risk index score 
c-statistic 0.86 
 
adequately 
Reference test a standard test 
Blinding – Not reported 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
207 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
 
Keren R; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Retrospective cohort/ 
diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
 
Infants with BW = 2000 g if 
GA = 36 weeks and BW = 2500 g if 
GA = 35 weeks participating in the 
hospital’s early discharge programme, 
and who had both pre and post-
discharge TSB levels measured at the 
phase when ≥ 75% babies had both 
the samples (n = 899) 
 
Group 1: infants with post-discharge 
TSB > 95th centile on nomogram 
(n = 98, 54% males, mean BW 
3.4 ± 0.5 kg) 
 
Group 2: infants with post-discharge 
TSB < 95th centile on nomogram 
(n = 801, 52% males, mean BW 
3.3 ± 0.5 kg) 
 
Exclusion: admission and treatment in 
intensive care nursery for neonatal 
illness and babies requiring 
phototherapy during birth 
hospitalisation. 
 
 
  
 
 
Test 1: 
Clinical risk factor score derived 
from regression modelling using 
the factors found independently 
associated with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia. 
 
Test 2: 
Pre-discharge TSB levels expressed 
as risk zone on an hour-specific 
bilirubin nomogram 
(High risk > 95th centile, High 
intermediate risk 76th – 95th 
centile, Low intermediate risk 40th 
– 75th centile, Low risk 0 – 40th 
centile) 
 
Reference standard: 
Significant Hyperbilirubinaemia 
defined as TSB level > 95th centile 
on hour-specific nomogram. 
 
Accuracy of Clinical risk score and 
pre-discharge TSB risk zone 
evaluated for predicting significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevalence of significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
98/899 (11%) 
 
Factors associated with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia (those with P < 0.2 in 
univariate analysis) 
 
Increased risk 
GA < 38 weeks and ≥ 40 weeks, large for 
gestational age babies, higher pre-discharge 
TSB risk zone, combined breast and bottle 
feeding, maternal diabetes, vacuum 
extraction, prolonged rupture, oxytocin use 
 
Decreased risk 
Small for gestational age, parity, caesarean 
section 
 
Factors independently associated with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia from 
multivariate regression analysis (OR with 
95% CI) 
 
Birthweight: 1.5 (1.2–1.9) 
GA < 38 weeks: 2.6 (1.5–4.5) 
Oxytocin: 2.0 (1.2–3.4) 
Vacuum delivery: 2.2 (1.5–3.6) 
Exclusive breastfeeding: 2.6 (1.5–4.5) 
Breast and bottle feeding: 2.3 (1.1–4.9) 
 
Clinical risk index scoring 
 
Birthweight: 3 points for 2501–3000 g, 6 for 
3001–3500 g, 9 for 3501–4000 g, 12 for 
4001–4500 g, 15 for 4501–5000 g 
GA < 38 weeks: 5 points Oxytocin: 4 points 
Vacuum delivery: 4 points Exclusive 
breastfeeding: points 
Breast and bottle feeding: 4 points 
 
Predictive accuracy for predicting 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
 
 
Retrospective cohort study 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard test 
Blinding – Not reported 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
208 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
RISK FACTOR SCORE 
 
c-statistic 0.71 (0.66–0.76) 
 
Risk index score 0–7 
+LR: 0.1 
 
Risk index score 8–11 
+LR: 0.4 
 
Risk index score 12–15 
+LR: 0.9 
 
Risk index score 16–19 
+LR: 2.0 
 
Risk index score 20–23 
+LR: 2.6 
 
Risk index score > 24 
+LR: 3.2 
 
PRE-DISCHARGE TSB 
 
c-statistic 0.83 (0.80–0.86) 
 
TSB centile 0–40th 
+LR: 0.05 
 
TSB centile 41–75th 
+LR: 0.2 
 
TSB centile 76–95th 
+LR: 2.2 
 
TSB centile > 95th 
+LR: 9.4 
 
 
Keren R et al.; 
 
Year: 2008 
 
Country: USA 
 
14 
 
Study Type: 
Prospective cohort 
study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Infants managed exclusively in the 
well infants nursery of an urban 
tertiary care hospital with 
GA = 36 weeks and BW = 2000 g or 
GA = 35 weeks and BW = 2500 g 
 
n = 812 
 
1) Factors associated with 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia in 
univariate analysis entered into 
regression modeling for clinical 
risk factor model 
 
2) Comparison of diagnostic 
 
Prevalence of significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
48/751 (6.4%) – 61 had an incomplete 
follow-up 
 
1) Association of factors with significant 
 
Unselected population 
(stratified sampling) with well 
defined exclusion criteria 
Baseline characteristics of two 
groups not compared 
Confounding variables 
controlled 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
209 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
 mean BW 3.3 ± 0.5 kg 
GA < 38 weeks: 13.4% 
Gender: males = 49.4% 
Ethnicity: 
White = 33.5% 
Black = 53.2% 
Asian = 9.8% 
Other = 3.4% 
 
Since the population in the area was 
predominantly black, stratified 
sampling scheme used to get a 
representative sample. 
Group 1: Infants with significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 48) 
 
Group 2: Infants without significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 703) 
 
Exclusion: 
babies transferred to the intensive care 
nursery for any reason 
Babies who received intravenous 
antibiotics for concern for sepsis. 
 
 
  
accuracy of three tests in predicting 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia by 
the c-statistic (mathematically 
equal to area under ROC curve) 
 
Test 1: 
Pre-discharge bilirubin measured 
either by TcB or TSB at < 52 hours 
of age, and expressed as risk-zone 
on hour specific nomogram. 
Daily TcB levels recorded using 
BiliChek, and TSB performed if 
TcB above 75th centile on hour-
specific nomogram or TcB 
reading = 205 micromol/litre. TSB 
value taken for analysis when both 
TcB and TSB done. 
 
Test 2: 
Clinical risk factors assessed by 
review of hospital charts for 
maternal race, 
intended method of feeding, 
GA, 
history of previous infant with 
jaundice, 
clinical assessment of jaundice, 
G6PD deficiency. 
 
Test 3: 
Combination of pre-discharge 
bilirubin risk zone and clinical risk 
factors. 
 
Reference standard: 
Bilirubin levels (TcB or TSB) 
measured on day 3–5 on both 
hospitalised and discharged babies 
(at home) using similar method as 
in Test 1, and Significant 
Hyperbilirubinaemia defined as 
bilirubin levels exceeding or within 
17 micromol/litre of the hour-
specific phototherapy treatment 
thresholds. 
 
hyperbilirubinaemia (Univariate analysis) 
(n = 812) 
 
Factors increasing risk 
 
Pre-discharge bilirubin – 
high risk zone OR: 147 (95% CI 34–639) 
high-intermediate risk zone OR: 21 (95% CI 
4.9–93.0) 
GA < 38 weeks OR: 9.2 (95% CI 4.4–19.0) 
intended breastfeeding OR: 2.2 (95% CI 
1.0–4.5) 
intended breast + bottle feeds OR: 3.7 
(95% CI 1.6–8.6) 
Grade 4 or higher degree of clinical jaundice 
OR 6.0 (95% CI 2.1 to 17) 
 
Factors decreasing risk 
Black race OR 0.43 )95% CI 0.23–0.80) 
Maternal history of smoking OR: Not 
reported 
 
Factors significant in multivariate analysis 
model (P < 0.05) 
 
GA< 38 weeks OR 19 (95% CI 6.3- 56) 
Mother’s plan of exclusive breastfeeding: 
OR 3.7 (95% CI 1.1- 13) 
Black race: OR 0.22 (95% CI 0.08- 0.61) 
Grade 4 or higher jaundice observed 
clinically: OR 1.7 (95% CI 1.2–2.6) 
Female sex: OR 3.2 (95% CI 1.2–8.4) 
 
2) Predictive ability of the three tests in 
predicting significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
(multivariate regression) 
 
Test 1: Pre-discharge bilirubin risk zone 
c-statistic 0.88 (95% 0.85 to 0.91) 
 
Test 2: Clinical risk factors (final model had 
5 factors – GA, intended method of feeding, 
black race, extent of jaundice and gender) 
c-statistic 0.91 (95% 0.86 to 0.97) 
 
Test 3: Combination model (pre-discharge 
risk zone + clinical factors of GA and % 
Methodology described 
adequately 
Blinding – not specified 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
210 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
weight loss) 
c-statistic 0.96 (95% 0.93 to 0.98) 
 
Test 3 vs Test 1 
p-value for difference< 0.01 
 
Test 3 vs Test 2 
p-value for difference = 0.15 
 
Test 2 vs Test 1 
p-value for difference = 0.35 
 
 
Herschel M; 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: USA 
 
41 
 
Study Type: 
Prospective 
diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
All consecutive babies admitted to the 
General Care Nursery of a tertiary 
care city hospital. 
 
Mean GA: 38.9 ± 1.4 weeks 
Mean BW: 3267 ± 480 g 
Gender: Males = 47.6%, 
 
Ethnicity: 
black - 82.9% 
white = 9.8% 
Hispanic = 3.3% 
Asian = 2% 
Other = 2% 
 
Results given separately for babies 
with smoking mothers and non-
smoking mothers. 
 
Exclusion: not defined  
 
Objective 1: 
Diagnostic accuracy of DAT 
 
Test: Direct Antiglobulin Test 
(DAT) done on cord blood of all 
newborn babies. 
 
Reference standard: Haemolysis 
identified by measuring ETCOc 
levels in all babies at 12 ± 6 hours 
and 24 ± 6 hours. Significant 
haemolysis defined as ETCOc 
levels = 95th centile in babies of 
non-smoking mothers at 12 hours 
(= 3.2 microlitre/litre), and among 
all babies at 24 hours (= 
2.5 microlitre/litre). 
 
Objective 2: 
Accuracy of DAT and ETCOc in 
predicting hyperbilirubinaemia 
defined as bilirubin reading = 75th 
centile on the nomogram (TcB 
readings with BiliChek at the time 
of discharge or earlier as clinically 
indicated, and subsequent TSB as 
deemed necessary) 
 
 
 
 
Objective 1: 
Prevalence of DAT positive results 
 
23/659 (3.5%) 
 
Accuracy of DAT in detecting haemolysis 
(ETCOc = 3.2 microlitre/litre) in babies of 
non-smoking mothers (n = 499) 
Sensitivity: 10/26 (38.5%) 
Specificity: 466/473 (98.5%) 
PPV: 10/17 (58.8%) 
NPV: 466/482 (96.7%) 
 
Accuracy of DAT in detecting haemolysis 
(ETCOc = 2.5 microlitre/litre) in babies of 
all mothers (n = 563) 
Sensitivity: 4/47 (8.5%) 
Specificity: 504/516 (97.6%) 
PPV: 4/16 (25.0%) 
NPV: 504/547 (92.1%) 
 
Objective 2: 
Prevalence of hyperbilirubinaemia. In 
babies of non-smoking mothers 
61/499 (12.2%) 
 
Accuracy of positive DAT test in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia in babies of non-
smoking mothers (n = 499) 
Sensitivity: 9/61 (14.7%) 
Specificity: 430/438 (98.2%) 
PPV: 9/17 (52.9%) 
NPV: 430/482 (89.2%) 
Accuracy of ETCOc 
(threshold = 2.5 microlitre/litre) in 
 
Unselected population but 
exclusion criteria not defined 
Test and Reference described 
adequately 
Reference test a standard one 
Blinding – Not reported 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
211 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
predicting hyperbilirubinaemia in babies of 
non-smoking mothers (n = 499) 
Sensitivity: 17/61 (27.9%) 
Specificity: 429/438 (97.9%) 
PPV: 17/26 (65.4%) 
NPV: 429/473 (90.7%) 
 
 
Risemberg HM; 
 
Year: 1977 
 
Country: USA 
 
42 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Prospective 
diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: III 
 
 
 
All consecutive newborns of hetero-
specific pregnancies (blood group O 
mothers with babies having blood 
group A or B) born in two hospitals 
(n = 91) 
 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: Rh incompatible babies 
 
Test 1: Coombs’ test done on cord 
blood of all newborn babies. 
 
Test 2: UCB levels measured 
(threshold value 
> 68 micromol/litre) 
 
Reference standard: 
Severe hyperbilirubinaemia defined 
as TSB > 274 micromol/litre at 12–
36 hours of age 
 
 
 
 
Prevalence of severe hyperbilirubinaemia 
13/91 (14.3%) 
 
Prevalence of DAT positive 
31/91 (34.1%) 
 
Accuracy of positive DAT test in predicting 
severe hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 91) 
Sensitivity: 12/13 (92.3%) 
Specificity: 59/78 (75.6%) 
PPV: 12/31 (38.7%) 
NPV: 58/60 (98.3%) 
Accuracy of UCB levels (threshold > 
68 micromol/litre) in predicting severe 
hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 91) 
Sensitivity: 12/13 (92.3%) 
Specificity: 78/78 (100%) 
PPV: 12/12 (100%) 
NPV: 78/79 (98.7%) 
 
Small sample 
Test and Reference standard 
not described in details 
Reference test a standard one 
Blinding – Not reported 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
212 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Chen JY; 
 
Year: 1994 
 
Country: Taiwan 
 
40 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic accuracy 
study 
 
Evidence Level: III 
 
 
 
 
 
Healthy term babies born to blood 
group O, Rh positive mothers and 
weighing = 2.5 kg with no evidence 
of perinatal asphyxia, polycythemia, 
huge cephalhematoma or infection. 
(n = 88) 
 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
 
 
Test 1: 
Direct Coombs’ test from cord 
blood. 
 
Test 2: UCB levels measured 
threshold value > 68 micromol/litre 
 
 
Reference standard: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia defined as 
TSB levels = 256 micromol/litre) 
within first 4 days of life and/or 
early jaundice with TSB 
levels = 171 micromol/litre within 
24 hours of birth 
 
 
Prevalence of DAT positive 
14/53 (26.4%) 
 
Prevalence of hyperbilirubinaemia 
29/53 (54.7%) 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of Coombs’ test for 
predicting hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 53) 
 
Sensitivity: 13/29 (44.8%) 
Specificity: 23/24 (95.8%) 
PPV: 13/14 (92.8%) 
NPV: 23/39 (59.0%) 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of UCB (> 
68 micromol/litre for predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 53) 
 
Sensitivity: 12/29 (41.4%) 
Specificity: 24/24 (100%) 
PPV: 12/12 (100%) 
NPV: 24/41 (58.5%) 
 
 
Small sample and data derived 
from results of two groups of 
babies with blood group A & B 
only 
Test & Reference test not 
described in detail 
Reference test is a standard one 
Blinding: none 
 
 
Sarici SU 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: Turkey 
 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
Study type: 
Prospective 
diagnostic study 
 
Evidence level: III 
 
All full-term babies (GA > 38 weeks) 
with blood groups A or B born to 
mothers with blood group O without 
simultaneous Rhesus blood factor 
incompatibility. (n = 150) 
 
Mean GA: 39.4 ± 1.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 3212 ± 415 g 
Gender: Males = 50.7% 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Test: Direct Antiglobulin Test 
(DAT) on cord blood 
 
Reference standard: Total serum 
bilirubin level (TSB) at 6, 30, 54, 
78 and 102 hours 
 
Hyperbilirubinaemia was defined 
as: 
TSB ≥ 85 micromol/litre and 
increase of 8.5 micromol/litre per 
hour in first 24 hours 
Day 2 TSB > 205 micromol/litre 
Day 3 TSB > 256 micromol/litre 
Day 4/5 TSB > 290 micromol/litre 
 
 
Prevalence of DAT positive 
4.4% (6/136) 
 
Prevalence of Hyperbilirubinaemia 
29/136 (21.3%) 
 
Accuracy of DAT in predicting 
hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 136) 
 
Sensitivity: 6/23 (20.1%) 
Specificity: 107/107 (100%) 
PPV: 6/6 (100%) 
NPV: 107/130 (82.3%) 
 
 
 
 
Aim of study was to see if 6hr 
TSB levels predicted 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
No data on 14 babies for 
clinical or consent reasons 
 
Selected sample and test not 
described. 
 
Reference is a standard test and 
was adequately described 
 
Blinding: None 
 
Meberg A 
 
Year: 1998 
 
Country: Norway 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic Accuracy 
study 
 
Evidence level: III 
 
All babies born in a general hospital. 
(n = 2463) 
 
Mean GA: Not reported (94.8% were 
term babies ≥ 27 weeks) 
 
Test: Direct Antiglobulin Test 
(DAT) on cord blood 
 
Reference: TSB levels requiring 
 
Prevalence of DAT positive 
4.1% (100/2,463) 
 
Prevalence of Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Universal sample 
 
Test: not adequately described 
 
Reference test is a standard one 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
213 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
38 
 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
 
Exclusion: 
Stillbirth, 
death, 
high-risk deliveries. 
severe neonatal conditions  
phototherapy according to the 
Hillingdon Hospital bilirubin chart. 
 
Phototherapy indicated at TSB 
> 350 micromol/litre at ≥ 72 hours 
for term babies 
 
TSB > 250 micromol/litre at 
≥ 120 hours for preterm babies 
 
TSB at lower levels for younger 
babies 
139/2,463 (5.6%) 
 
Accuracy of DAT in predicting need for 
phototherapy for hyperbilirubinaemia 
(n = 2463) 
 
Sensitivity: 20/139 (14.4%) 
Specificity: 2244/2324 (96.6%) 
PPV: 20/100 (20.0%) 
NPV: 2244/2463 (91.1%) 
 
but not described adequately 
 
Blinding: None 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
214 
Evidence table – Prediction of hyperbilirubinaemia (effectiveness) 
 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Petersen JR; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: USA 
 
43 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Retrospective cohort 
study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Babies with a diagnosis-related group 
designation indicating ‘normal 
newborn’ and admitted in the 
newborn unit of a tertiary hospital 
from August 2002 to December 2003. 
(n = 6603, males 52.9%) 
 
Group 1: babies born before TcB 
introduced – August 2002 to March 
2003 
(n = 3237, 51.3% males) 
 
Group 2: babies born after TcB 
introduced – May 2003 to December 
2003 
(n = 3366, 53.2% males) 
 
Exclusion: babies who did not fit the 
criterion of ‘normal newborns’, and 
those born in the transitional time – 
April 2003 
 
Comparison of the number of 
births, number of vaginal and 
caesarean deliveries, ethnicity and 
gender distribution, newborn 
readmission rates, and number of 
serum bilirubin measurements 
between Group 1 vs Group 2 
 
 
Comparison of bilirubin testing (values in 
mean (SD) 
 
Number of monthly admissions 
404.6 (33.2) vs 420.7 (36.8), p=0.42 
 
Number of newborns tested monthly 
128.0 (26.1) vs 152.1 (26.2), p=0.10 
 
% of newborns tested by TSB levels 
6.4% vs 8.7% 
p=0.21 
 
Serum bilirubin measurement per newborn 
1.51 vs 1.56 
p=0.33 
 
Total bilirubin measurement (TcB +TSB) 
0.37 vs 0.61 
p=0.007 
 
% of newborns treated with phototherapy 
5.9% vs 7.7% 
p=0.014 
 
Newborn readmissions for hyperbil. within 
7 days of initial discharge (per 1000 births) 
4.5 vs 1.8 
p=0.044 
 
Retrospective cohort study 
Some of the baseline 
characteristics compared 
between the two groups, but 
information not given for all 
variables. Confounding 
variables not adjusted 
 
 
 
Ebbesen F; 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: 
Denmark 
 
45 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: III 
 
 
 
All newborns more than 24 hours old 
who for clinical reasons had their 
plasma bilirubin determination during 
the day, except at weekends. 
 
Group 1: Both preterm infants 
< 35 weeks and sick term and near-
term infants in the NICU 
 
n = 261 
mean BW 2521 g - range 680 to 
4645 g, mean GA 34.6 weeks - range 
25 to 43 weeks postnatal age at 1st 
TcB: 98.4 - range 48 – 840 
 
TcB measurement using BiliChek 
from forehead, sternum, knee and 
the foot – mean of 5 measurements 
from each site taken for data 
analysis. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels taken concurrently with 
TcB measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB from 
forehead (threshold ≥ 0.70 of 
phototherapy limit) estimated for 
predicting TSB levels ≥ 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 210) 
 
Group 1: 
Forehead 
r = 0.88, p > 0.05 
Sternum 
r = 0.82, P < 0.001 
Knee 
r = 0.77, P < 0.001 
Foot 
r = 0.51, P < 0.001 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not given for the mean 
difference and SD from Bland 
Altman analysis for TSB - TcB 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
215 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Gender: Males = 60.1% 
 
Ethnicity: 
Non-northern European descent = 9% 
 
 
Group 2: Healthy term and near-term 
infants with GA ≥ 35 weeks in the 
maternity ward 
 
n = 227 
mean BW 3362 g - ange 2170 to 
5000 g 
mean GA 38.6 weeks - range 35 to 
43 weeks 
postnatal age at 1st TcB: 74.4 - range 
48 – 360 Gender: Males = 55.5% 
 
Ethnicity: 
Non-northern European descent = 7% 
 
Exclusion: 
babies already receiving phototherapy 
or who received phototherapy 6 hours 
before TSB measurement, 
with skin infection, 
purpura, 
bruising 
phototherapy limits as suggested by 
the Danish Pediatric Society 
 
On comparing correlation coefficient of 
forehead with that for sternum, knee and 
foot, P < 0.001 for each of the comparison 
 
Group 2: 
Forehead 
r = 0.87, p > 0.05 
Sternum 
r = 0.90, P < 0.05 
Knee 
r = 0.83, P < 0.05 
Foot 
r = 0.63, P < 0.001 
 
On comparing correlation coefficient of 
forehead with that for sternum, knee and 
foot, P < 0.05 for comparison with knee and 
foot only 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 0.70 times the phototherapy limit) from 
forehead in detecting TSB > phototherapy 
limit 
 
Group 1 (n = 504 observations): 
Sensitivity: 108/109 (99.1%) 
Specificity: 177/395 (44.8%) 
PPV: 108/326 (33.1%) 
NPV: 177/178 (99.4%) 
 
Group 2 (n = 317 observations): 
Sensitivity: 3/3 (100%) 
Specificity: 254/314 (80.9%) 
PPV: 3/63 (4.8%) 
NPV: 254/254 (100%) 
 
Samanta S; 
 
Year: 2004 
 
Country: 
UK 
 
44 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
All babies > 33 weeks in the postnatal 
ward of a regional teaching hospital 
who were due to have blood taken for 
TSB estimation 
 
n = 300 
median BW 3295 g – range 1972 to 
4720 
median GA 39 weeks – range 33 to 42 
median postnatal age: 72 hours – 
range 24 to 264 
 
TcB using BiliChek (site not 
specified) – single measurement 
taken. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels taken concurrently with 
TcB measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB 
(various thresholds) estimated by 
plotting ROC curve. 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 300) 
 
r = 0.77, P < 0.0001 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between TcB and lab TSB 
 
MD = -10.6 micromol/litre (95% CI -80.0 to 
+60.0) 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
216 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Gender: Males = 50% 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
250 micromol/litre = 55/300 (18.3%) 
 
Exclusion: babies who had previously 
received phototherapy 
 SD = Not reported 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 195 micromol/litre) for detecting TSB > 
250 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 50/55 (90.9%) 
Specificity: 162/245 (66.1%) 
PPV: 50/133 (37.6%) 
NPV: 162/167 (97%) 
 
Briscoe L; 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: 
UK 
 
46 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Babies > 34 weeks who were having 
blood taken for any reason, mostly 
done for clinical jaundice. 
 
n = 303 
median BW 3267 g - range 1800–
5008 
median GA 39 weeks - range 34–42 
median age at presentation: 3 – range 
0 to 13 days 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
White: 94.7% 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
300 micromol/litre = 3.3% (10/303) 
 
Exclusion: babies who had previously 
received phototherapy 
 
TcB reading using Minolta JM-102 
at the forehead 
(mean of 3 readings used for 
analysis) 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels measured concurrently 
 
For diagnostic accuracy: 
Area under ROC curve calculated 
for detecting TSB 
> 249 micromol/litre 
 
 
 
Correlation of JM-102 with lab TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 303) 
 
r = 0.76, P < 0.0001 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of JM-102 for detecting 
TSB > 249 micromol/litre (n = 303) 
 
Area under ROC = 0.89 
 
Predictive accuracy of JM-102 value 19.9 
(highest accuracy from ROC curve) 
Sensitivity: 86% (81–89%) 
Specificity: 78% (73–83%) 
PPV: Not reported 
NPV: Not reported 
 
In this study a reading of > 18 reflectance 
units was taken as an indicator for serum 
bilirubin, resulting in a reduction of 34% in 
the number of blood samples taken. 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN 
 
 
Bhutani VK; 
 
Year: 2006 
 
Country: USA 
 
47 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Observational study 
 
Evidence Level: III 
 
 
 
All babies born from 01 January 1990 
to 31 December 2000 who were 
discharged from the well-baby 
nursery of a tertiary hospital as term 
and near-term healthy babies. 
 
n = 31 059 
mean BW: 3318 ± 457 g mean GA: 
38.7 ± 1.3 weeks 
Gender: Males = Not reported 
 
Ethnicity: 
White = 43.5% 
 
Incremental hospital systems 
approach in the management of 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia 
studied with different clinical 
approaches at different phases: 
Phase 1: 
selective pre-discharge TSB 
measurements (1990–1992) 
Phase 2: 
universal TSB measurement at the 
time of metabolic screening with an 
authority given to nurses (after in-
service workshops and training) to 
obtain bilirubin estimation at their 
 
Incidence of adverse outcomes for term and 
near-term infants in the well-baby nursery 
Hospital-based intensive phototherapy 
Phase 1: 3.6% 
Phase 2: 4.5% 
Phase 3: 5.4% 
Phase 4: 2.5% 
Phase 5: 1.3% 
 
Exchange transfusion 
(in risk) 
Phase 1: 1:2137 
Phase 2: 1:1322 
Phase 3: 1:1637 
 
Non-comparative observational 
study 
Time periods of different 
clinical approaches 
overlapping. Confounding 
variables not adjusted 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
217 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Black = 39.1% 
Asian = 6.9% 
Hispanic = 4.5% 
 
 
Exclusion: 
low BW preterm babies admitted to 
the well-baby nursery 
babies admitted to and treated in the 
intensive care nursery for any 
neonatal illness 
own discretion (1993–95) 
Phase 3: 
universal TSB screening along with 
post-discharge follow-up based on 
the hour-specific nomogram 
(1996–98) 
Phase 4: 
organised institutional systems-
based management of newborn 
jaundice (1999–2000) 
Phase 5: 
impact of the complete approach 
assessed in 2001–2003. 
 
Under the systems-based approach 
all babies had pre-discharge 
bilirubin estimation (TSB or TcB) 
and follow-up care for jaundice 
was given either at the hospital 
(more than 85% cases) or at home 
within 24–48 hours of discharge. 
Other components of the approach 
included lactation support services, 
counselling and information to 
parents on the clinical course and 
rare risk of neurotoxicity, and close 
follow-up of jaundiced babies 
based on their hour-specific 
bilirubin levels. 
A clinical evaluation for jaundice 
severity was mandatory for all 
babies at about the age of 4 days, 
along with subsequent follow-up of 
at-risk infants at age 7 days and 
2 weeks. 
Phase 4: 1:3198 
Phase 5: 1:11995 
 
Number of readmissions 
14 per 1000 well-baby infants discharged in 
1994 to 5.5 per 1000 in 2001–2003. 
 
Results in babies (6 – 72 hours of age) with 
ABO incompatibility (n = 553) 
 
High risk zone or TSB > 95th centile (n = 55 
or 9.9%) 
 
Phototherapy: 54.5% 
Exchange Transfusion: 5.4% 
Length of stay: 3.3 days 
 
Intermediate risk zone or TSB 40th-74th 
centile (n = 233 or 42.1%) 
 
Phototherapy: 22.7%, 
Exchange Transfusion: 0% 
Length of stay 2.6 days 
 
Low risk zone or TSB < 40th centile 
(n = 265 or 48.0%) 
 
Phototherapy: 2.6% 
Exchange Transfusion: 0% 
length of stay: 2.36 days 
 
 Eggert LD; 
 
Year: 2006 
 
Country: USA 
 
48 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Retrospective cohort 
study 
 
Evidence Level: II 
 
 
 
Retrospective cohort study to 
determine the effectiveness of a pre-
discharge bilirubin screening 
programme instituted in December 
2002. 
 
 
All babies delivered at = 35 weeks of 
gestation within a private healthcare 
organisation involving 18 hospitals 
during two time periods: 
 
 
Pre-discharge bilirubin screening 
programme started in December 
2002 to measure bilirubin levels in 
every baby either at the recognition 
of jaundice or before discharge 
from hospital. 
Two hospitals used TcB (BiliChek) 
levels while others used TSB. 
Bilirubin levels plotted on the hour-
specific nomogram and 
levels = 40th centile notified to the 
relevant healthcare provider and 
 
Incidence of severe hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
TSB levels ≥ 342 micromol/litre 
Group 1 - 1:77 
Group 2 - 1:142 
P < 0.0001 
 
TSB levels ≥ 428 micromol/litre 
Group 1 - 1:1522 
Group 2 - 1:4037 
P < 0.005 
 
 
Retrospective cohort study with 
exclusion criteria not defined 
Baseline characteristics of the 
two groups not compared 
Confounding variables not 
adjusted 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
218 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Group 1: before the programme 
started from 01 March 2001 to 31 
December 2002, 
 
Group 2: after the programme started 
from 01 January 2003 to 31 December 
2004. 
 
Exclusion: Not defined 
baby managed according to his/her 
discretion. 
 
After first 3 months percentile 
tracks of the nomogram modified 
since a large number of babies had 
bilirubin levels in the high or 
intermediate-high zones 
TSB levels ≥ 513 micromol/litre 
Group 1 - 1:9742 
Group 2 - 1:17494 
p=0.24 
 
Incidence of hospital readmissions for 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Group 1 - 0.55% 
Group 2 - 0.43% 
P < 0.005 
 
 
Madan A 
 
Year: 2004 
 
Country: USA 
 
49 
 
Study type: 
Retrospective 
observational study 
 
Evidence level: III 
 
All babies (n = 4450) of which those 
born to blood type O or Rh negative 
mothers (n = 2443) 
 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: 
Asian = 45.9% 
White = 36.8% 
 
Exclusion criteria: None 
 
Test: Direct Antiglobulin Test 
(DAT) on cord blood. 
 
Reference standard: 
phototherapy/readmission for 
phototherapy 
 
Prevalence of DAT positive 
7.9% (193/2,443) 
 
Rate of phototherapy: 
among DAT positive cases was 18.6% 
(36/193). 
 
Rates for readmission for phototherapy: 
among tested babies: 1.1% (26/2,443) 
among untested babies : 0.9% (19/2,097) 
 
Odds Ratio (OR): 1.18 (95% CI 0.65 – 2.13) 
 
Data not reliable: authors 
reported not determining the 
number of DAT negative who 
were treated for jaundice before 
readmission 
 
Sample: Selective 
 
Blinding: None 
 
 
 
Leistikow EA 
 
Year: 1995 
 
Country: USA 
 
51 
 
Study type: 
Health economics 
study 
 
Evidence level: III 
 
All patients in Neonatal Intensive 
Care Unit; 
babies with clinical jaundice; 
babies with Rh negative mothers 
and/or positive maternal antibody 
screenings; 
no available maternal blood 
 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Test: Direct Antiglobulin Test 
(DAT) on cord blood. 
 
Reference standard: 
Readmission for jaundice  
 
Prevalence of DAT positive: Not reported 
 
Percentage of babies tested 
Among universal testing (2,253/4,003) 
56.3% 
among selective testing (1,048/4,498) 
23.3% 
 
Rate of readmission for hyperbilirubinaemia 
among universally tested babies 
0.4 (15/4,003) 
among selectively tested babies 
0.3 (15/4,498) 
 
Odds Ratio (OR) 1.12 
(95% CI 0.56 – 2.30) 
 
 
Small study 
 
No definition on readmission 
for hyperbilirubinaemia given 
 
Sample: Non-selective 
 
Blinding: None 
 
Madlon-Kay DJ 
 
Year: 1992 
 
 
Study type 
Retrospective cohort 
study: 
 
 
All babies in normal nursery cared for 
by family practice service were 
included (n = 301) 
 
 
Test: Direct Antiglobulin Test 
(DAT) on cord blood. 
 
Reference standard: 
 
Overall Prevalence of DAT positive 
9.0% (27/301) 
 
 
Small sample 
 
Test and reference standard not 
described in details 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
219 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Country: USA 
 
50 
Evidence Level: III Sample was split between those tested 
automatically (n = 113) and those 
tested selectively (n = 188) 
 
Mean GA: 39.4 weeks 
Mean BW: 3344 g 
Gender: Males = 50.5% 
Ethnicity: 
White = 44.5% 
Black = 16.3% 
Asian = 17.9% 
Other = 21.3% 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
babies in intensive care 
Need for phototherapy (no clear 
definition) 
Overall rate of phototherapy 
12/301 (3.9%) 
 
Rates of phototherapy 
among universally tested babies 4/113 
(3.5%) 
among selectively tested babies 8/188 
(4.3%) 
 
Odds Ratio (OR) 0.83 (95% CI: 0.24 – 2.81) 
 
Rates of readmission for phototherapy 
among universally tested babies 2/113 
(1.8%) 
among selectively tested babies 1/188 
(0.5%) 
 
Odds Ratio (OR) 3.36 
(0.32 – 37.58) 
 
Blinding: None 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
220 
What is the best method of recognising hyperbilirubinaemia? 
 
 
 
Evidence table – Recognition 
 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Riskin A; 
 
Year: 2008 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
61 
 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
Ib 
 
 
 
 
 
Healthy full term and late preterm babies 
(≥ 35 weeks) examined for clinical 
jaundice before discharge (days 2 to 5 of 
life) in a hospital 
 
n = 1129, 
total observations = 3532, 
mean BW 3298 ± 462 g, 
mean GA 39.5 ± 1.4 weeks, 
mean time of assessment 62 ± 24 hours 
(median 55 hours; range 9 to 252 hours) 
Gender: Males = 52.3% 
 
Ethnicity 
Majority reported as Ashkenazi or 
Sephardic Jews (73%) or Arabs (26%) 
 
Exclusion: babies with < 50 
observations, visual assessment done 
after starting phototherapy 
 
Test: Visual assessment of jaundice 
(BiliEye) by experienced observers 
(total 23 observers – 5 
neonatologists and 17 nurses, mean 
experience 11.4 ± 10.2 years). 
 
No. of observations per observer 
were record in 1195 encounters 
with a mean of 3.0 ± 1.8 
observers. 
 
The observers were identified by 
code numbers and unaware of 
laboratory TSB values and BiliEye 
values made by other observers. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 1 hr 
 
Analysis: After determining 
correlation between BiliEye and lab 
TSB, the values were grouped into 
risk zones according to Bhutani 
nomogram. 
 
Accuracy of BiliEye in determining 
TSB levels (or degree of 
hyperbilirubinaemia) evaluated. 
 
Ability of BiliEye to detect 
significant hyperbilirubinaemia 
(defined as zones C+D on 
nomogram) analysed by ROC 
curve – after correcting for 
postpartum age and GA 
 
 
 
Correlation of visual assessment of TSB 
levels with lab TSB (Pearson correlation 
coefficient, n = 3532 observations) 
 
All observers 
Weighted r = 0.75, P < 0.001 
κ (weighted) = 0.363 
 
Each observer separately (range) 
r = 0.51 to 0.88 
κ = 0.11 to 0.52 
 
Accuracy of BiliEye for determining TSB 
values 
(after grouping Zones B, C & D together 
versus Zone A) 
 
Sensitivity: 337/567 (59.4%) 
Specificity: 2627/2965 (88.6%) 
PPV: 337/675 (49.9%) 
NPV: 2627/2857 (91.9%) 
 
False negative rate of BiliEye 
 
Zone A: 230/2857 (8.1%) 
 
Zone C + D: 67/109 (61.5%) 
 
Zone D only: 13/15 (86.7%) 
 
Difference between BiliEye and laboratory 
TSB values 
 
All observers 
MD = 0.11 ± 2.17 
 
 
Unselected population with 
defined exclusion criterion 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes 
 
Funding: None specified 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
221 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Each observer separately 
P < 0.001 for both the mean values and 
absolute values 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of BiliEye in detecting 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Area ROC = 0.82 
 
Best AROC 
0.93 for observations at > 60 hours in babies 
≥ 37 weeks GA 
 
Worst AROC 
0.64 for observations at < 36 hours 
0.61 for babies < 37 weeks 
 
 
Moyer VA; 
 
Year: 2000 
 
Country: USA 
 
60 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Full-term healthy babies (BW > 2000 g 
and GA> 36 weeks) in well-newborn 
nursery of an urban public hospital, in 
whom TSB was measured because of 
clinical jaundice, Rh-negative mother or 
positive maternal Coomb’s test. 
 
n = 122, 
GA: > 36 weeks 
BW > 2,000 g 
mean age = 2 days (range 8 to 168 hours) 
Gender: Males = 54.1% 
Ethnicity 
Not reported 
 
 
 
Exclusion: babies having previous TSB 
determination and under phototherapy 
 
Visual observation by two 
experienced staff (paediatric 
residents, paediatric nurse 
practitioners, paediatric physicians) 
regarding 
a) Subjective assessment of 
presence/absence of icterus at 
different sites 
b) Estimated TSB levels 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 1 hr 
 
 
 
Agreement between observers on 
presence/absence of icterus at different sites 
(Weighted κ with 95% CI) 
 
Face & neck: 
0.16 (-0.02 to 0.34) 
Neck to nipple line: 
0.15 (0.01 to 0.29) 
Nipple line to umbilicus: 
0.23 (0.09 to 0.38) 
Umbilicus to groin: 
0.19 (0.05 to 0.34) 
Upper legs: 
0.20 (0.06 to 0.35) 
 
Weighted K not statistically significant for 
other sites – Lower legs, Soles, Arms, 
Palms, Tip of nose and palate 
 
Correlation of estimated TSB levels with lab 
TSB (Pearson correlation coefficient) 
 
Observer 1: r = 0.43 
Observer 2: r = 0.54 
 
Accuracy of clinical icterus in lower chest 
(nipple line to umbilicus) in detecting TSB > 
205 micromol/litre (n = 243 observations) 
 
 
Unselected population 
Reference test not described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes 
 
Funding: Not reported 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
222 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Sensitivity: 97.1% (67/69) 
Specificity: 19.0% (33/174) 
PPV: 32.2% (67/208) 
NPV: 94.3% (33/35) 
 
 
Madlon-Kay DJ; 
 
Year: 2001 
 
Country: USA 
 
59 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Newborn babies delivered in a hospital 
with follow-up visit at home by Home 
Health Nurses. 
 
(n = 164, 
mean GA: Not reported 
mean BW: Not reported 
mean age at assessment 6.4 ± 2.5 days) 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity (nurse determination) 
white = 60% 
black = 18% 
Asian = 6% 
Hispanic = 7% 
Other = 9% 
 
Exclusion: babies who were in intensive 
care nursery or received phototherapy, 
Also babies whose mothers lived more 
than 10 miles from hospital or were not 
proficient in English 
 
Babies examined by 12 home health 
nurses. 
 
1) Clinical assessment by nurses 
with their usual method (e.g 
blanching skin, judging degree of 
yellowness with caudal 
progression, looking for jaundice at 
sclera, gums, nose) 
 
2) Caudal progression of jaundice 
alone as assessed by nurses 
 
3) Ingram Icterometer reading from 
nose 
Threshold for diagnostic accuracy – 
reading > 2.5 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 1 hr 
 
 
 
TSB levels (micromol/litre) 
All babies (n = 164) 
Mean (sd) 125 (80) 
Range: 12 to 345 
 
Babies assessed to be jaundiced by nurses 
(n = 82) 
Mean (sd): 180 (68.4) 
 
Babies assessed not to be jaundiced by 
nurses (n = 82) 
Mean (sd): 72 (46) 
 
Comparison 1: 
 
Correlation of estimated TSB levels with lab 
TSB (Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 82 
where sampling done) 
 
r = 0.61, P < 0.01 
 
Comparison 2: 
 
Correlation of estimated TSB levels with lab 
TSB (Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 82 
where sampling done) 
r = 0.47, P < 0.01 
 
Accuracy of test (caudal progression to 
nipple line) in detecting TSB 
> 205 micromol/litre (N = Not reported) 
Sensitivity: 76% 
Specificity: 60% 
 
Comparison 3: 
 
Correlation of estimated TSB levels with lab 
TSB (Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 82 
where sampling done) 
r = 0.48, P < 0.01 
 
Accuracy of test in detecting TSB 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not extractable for 
calculating exact values of TP, 
FP, TN & FN 
 
Funding: Ramsey Foundation 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
223 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
> 205 micromol/litre (N = Not reported) 
Sensitivity: 75% 
Specificity: 72% 
 
 
Riskin A; 
 
Year: 2003 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
58 
 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
 
 
Full term babies (37–42 weeks) with 
clinical jaundice in the nursery of a 
tertiary care hospital. Includes babies 
with ABO incompatibility and G6PD 
deficiency. 
 
n = 283 
mean age at assessment 
63.8 ± 21.6 hours 
mean GA: 39.5 ± 1.5 weeks 
mean BW: 3223 ± 484 g 
Gender: Males = 51.2% 
 
Ethnicity 
Majority reported as Jews (76%) or 
Arabs (24%) 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
Visual observation by one of four 
attending neonatologists before 
discharge of baby from the nursery 
regarding 
a) Assessment of clinical jaundice 
severe enough to draw blood 
sample 
b) Estimated TSB levels 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 30 mins 
 
 
Correlation of estimated TSB levels with lab 
TSB (Pearson correlation coefficient) 
 
All physicians (n = 283): 
r = 0.68, P < 0.001 
 
Physician 1 (n = 74) 
r = 0.79, P < 0.001 
 
Physician 2 (n = 62) 
r = 0.64, P < 0.001 
 
Physician 3 (n = 69) 
r = 0.70, P < 0.001 
 
Physician 4 (n = 78) 
r = 0.62, P < 0.001 
 
 
Selected population with no 
exclusion criterion 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes 
Data not extractable for 
calculating TP, FP, TN & FN 
values 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
224 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Madlon-Kay DJ; 
 
Year: 1997 
 
Country: USA 
 
57 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Babies with age > 2 days in a normal 
newborn nursery.in a teaching hospital 
 
(n = 171 
mean GA 39 weeks) 
mean BW: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Maternal ethnicity 
white = 50% 
black = 24% 
Asian = 13% 
Hispanic = 9% 
Other = 4% 
 
Exclusion: babies who received 
phototherapy, and whose parents were 
unable to read and understand the 
instruction form 
 
1) Clinical estimation of degree of 
jaundice and cephalo-caudal 
progression by nurses and 
physicians by blanching the skin. 
(36 nurses, 20 family physicians 
and 4 paediatricians) 
 
2) Clinical assessment of jaundice 
by the parents after receiving 
written and verbal instructions 
about the process 
(147 parents with 81% having 
English as the primary language 
and 46% having completed high 
school) 
 
3) Ingram Icterometer readings 
from nose (n = 132 readings) 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 1 hr 
 
Correlation between the estimated 
and the observed TSB values 
determined before and after 
adjusting for various factors 
 
Prevalence of hyperbilirubinaemia 
(TSB = 205 micromol/litre 
11/89 (12.3%) 
 
Correlation of estimated TSB levels with lab 
TSB values after adjusting for various 
confounding factors like level of training, 
race, etc (Pearson correlation coefficient) 
 
Nurse estimate of TSB 
r = 0.52, P < 0.001 
 
Nurse assessment of cephalo-caudal 
progress 
r = 0.48. P < 0.05 
 
Physician estimate of TSB 
r = 0.55, P < 0.05 
 
Physician assessment of cephalo-caudal 
progress 
r = 0.35. p > 0.05 
 
Parent assessment of cephalo-caudal 
progress 
r = 0.71, P < 0.01 
 
Icterometer 
r = 0.57, P = 0.002 
 
 
 
Study population selected by 
convenience sampling 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour, but 
reference test (laboratory TSB) 
not conducted in all babies 
(89/171) 
Blinding – yes 
Data not extractable for 
calculating exact values of TP, 
FP, TN & FN 
 
 
 
Szabo P; 
 
Year: 2004 
 
Country: 
Switzerland 
 
55 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Healthy preterm babies 34–37 weeks 
with BW > 2000 g and no older than 
6 days in maternity ward and 
intermediate care neonatal unit. 
 
n = 69, 
median GA: 35.7 weeks – range 34 to 
36.9 weeks 
median BW 2530 g – range 2050 to 
3630 g 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
white = 87% 
 
1) Clinical assessment by nurses 
and primary investigator using 
Kramer criterion 
 
2) TcB using Minolta JM-102 at 
the sternum 
(mean of two readings used for 
analysis) 
 
3) TcB using BiliChek at the 
forehead and sternum 
(mean of 5 readings used for 
analysis) 
 
 
Comparison 1: 
 
Correlation of estimated TSB levels with lab 
TSB (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 107 observations) 
By nurses 
R2 = 0.22, P < 0.01 
By primary investigator 
R2 = 0.20, P < 0.01 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 190 micromol/litre (Area under ROC 
curve, N = Not reported) 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values for TP, FP, 
TN & FN 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
225 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
black = 4% 
Asian = 7% 
Other = 2% 
 
Exclusion: jaundice above zone 3 of 
Kramer scale within 48 hours, positive 
DCT, 
BW < 10th centile for GA, 
any sign or symptom of illness, 
phototherapy already started 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 30 min. Mean of 
two samples used for analysis. 
 
For diagnostic accuracy: 
Area under ROC curve calculated 
for detecting TSB > 190 
 
 
By nurses 
Area = 0.73 
By primary investigator 
Area = 0.70 
κ = 0.48 
 
 
Comparison 2: 
 
Correlation of JM-102 with lab TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 107 
observations) 
R2 = 0.76, P < 0.01 
Difference to TSB: 56 ± 28 micromol/litre 
 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 190 micromol/litre (Area underROC 
curve, N = Not reported) 
Area = 0.96 
 
Comparison 3: 
 
At forehead 
Correlation of BiliChek with lab TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 107 
observations) 
R2 = 0.45, P < 0.01 
Difference to TSB: -8 ± 33 micromol/litre 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 190 micromol/litre (Area underROC 
curve, N = Not reported) 
Area = 0.88 
 
At sternum 
Correlation of BiliChek with lab TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 107 
observations) 
R2 = 0.59, P < 0.01 
Difference to TSB: 10 ± 31 micromol/litre 
 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 190 micromol/litre (Area underROC 

Neonatal jaundice 
226 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
curve, N = Not reported) 
Area = 0.89 
 
 
Szabo P; 
 
Year: 2004 
 
Country: 
Switzerland 
 
56 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Healthy full-term babies (37–41 weeks) 
with BW > 2000 g and no older than 
6 days. 
 
(n = 140, 92 white and 48 non-white 
babies, median BW 3320 g) 
range 2050 to 4400 g 
median GA: 39 weeks – range 37 to 
41.9 weeks 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
white = 66% 
Asian = 13% 
Other = 21% 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolysis 
jaundice within first 36 hours 
phototherapy 
 
1) Clinical assessment by nurses 
and primary investigator using 
Kramer criterion 
 
2) TcB using Minolta JM-102 at 
the sternum 
(higher of two readings used for 
analysis) 
 
3) TcB using BiliChek at the 
forehead and sternum 
(mean of 5 readings used for 
analysis) 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 30 min 
 
For diagnostic accuracy: 
Area under ROC curve calculated 
for detecting TSB 
> 250 micromol/litre 
 
 
 
Comparison 1: 
 
Correlation of estimated TSB levels with lab 
TSB (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
N = not reported) 
 
For white babies 
R2 = 0.74 (by nurse) 
R2 = 0.70 (by investigator) 
 
For non-white babies 
R2 = 0.71 (by nurse) 
R2 = 0.65 (by investigator) 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 250 micromol/litre (Area underROC 
curve, N = Not reported) 
Area = 0.84 
 
Comparison 2: 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, N = Not 
reported) 
R2 = 0.82, P < 0.01 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 250 micromol/litre (Area under ROC 
curve, N = Not reported) 
Area = 0.98 
 
Comparison 3 (at forehead): 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, N = Not 
reported) 
R2 = 0.79, P < 0.01 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 250 micromol/litre (Area under ROC 
curve, N = Not reported) 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
227 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Area = 0.92 
 
Crofts DJ; 
 
Year: 1999 
 
Country: UK 
 
62 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Non-diagnostic 
study (Project 
report) 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
 
 
Mothers and their newborn babies born 
and resident of Sheffield and who were 
routinely visited by the health visitor at 
28 days of age. 
 
Phase 1: (n = 109 parent-baby pairs, total 
stool observations = 5053) 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 56.9% 
 
Ethnicity: 
Not reported 
 
Phase 3: (n = 3629 mother-baby pairs) 
 
 
Phase 1: Inspection of stools, by 
parents, from healthy babies and 
babies with cholestatic liver disease 
during the first 28 days of age to 
devise a stool colour chart using 20 
colours 
 
Phase 2: development of stool chart 
– six most commonly selected stool 
colours from each of main colour 
groups together with three pale 
colours used to develop a stool 
chart. 
 
Phase 3: Assess specificity of 
colour chart – charts given to all 
mothers at first health visitor visit 
(at 10–14 days), and information 
collected at second visit of health 
visitor (at 28 days). 
Babies with suspicion of jaundice 
or history of passing pale stools 
referred for further investigation 
 
 
Incidence of jaundice 
 
Related to breastfeeding 
3.4% (95% CI 2.9%, 4.1%) 
 
At 28 days in breastfed babies 
9.2% (95% CI 7.8%, 11.0%) 
 
% with abnormal LFT (n = 60) 
 
Abnormal GGT and ALT 
38.3% (23/60) 
 
Abnormal Alk. phosphate 
70% (42/60) 
 
Reasons for non-referral of babies with 
prolonged jaundice (n = 14) 
 
9 = babies well and thriving 
2 = confusion between midwife and health 
visitor 
2 = family moving out 
1 = refusal 
 
 
Report of a community 
programme (non-diagnostic 
study) Unselected population 
 
No demographic details 
reported 
 
Bilgen H; 
 
Year: 1998 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
66 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Healthy term babies with jaundice aged 
more than 1 day but less than 5 days in a 
hospital. 
 
n = 96 
mean BW 3380 ± 419 g 
mean GA: 39.6 ± 1.4 weeks 
age at presentation: range 1 to 5 days 
Gender: Males = 58% 
 
Ethnicity: 
Not reported 
 
Exclusion: not received phototherapy 
 
1) Ingram Icterometer on the nose 
 
Threshold: reading ≥ 33 for best 
accuracy results 
 
2) TcB using Minolta JM-102 on 
the forehead 
 
Threshold: reading > 13 for best 
accuracy results 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 30 min 
 
 
 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
220 micromol/litre = 18% (17/96) 
 
Comparison 1: 
 
Correlation of JM-102 with lab TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 96) 
r = 0.83, P < 0.01 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 220 micromol/litre 
Sensitivity: 100% (17/17) 
Specificity: 55.7% (35/79) 
PPV: 32.7% (17/52) 
NPV: 100% (44/44) 
 
Comparison 2: 
 
Correlation of Icterometer with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
 
Selected population 
Test & Reference test not 
described in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
228 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
n = 96) 
r = 0.78, P < 0.01 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting TSB 
> 220 micromol/litre 
Sensitivity: 100% (17/17) 
Specificity: 48.1% (38/79) 
PPV: 29.3% (17/58) 
NPV: 100% (38/38) 
 
 
Merritt KA; 
 
Year: 1994 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
65 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Preterm babies with jaundice in a 
hospital. 
 
n = 90 
mean BW 1676 g, mean GA 31.7 weeks 
age at presentation: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
White = 95% 
Other = 5% 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
1) Gosset Icterometer on the nose 
by two experienced and one 
inexperienced observer 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 30 min 
 
 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = number of observations) 
 
All infants (n = 296) 
r = 0.72, P < 0.01 
 
Experienced observer 1 (n = 239) 
r = 0.71, P < 0.01 
 
Experienced observer 2 (n = 166) 
r = 0.75, P < 0.01 
 
Inexperienced observer 
r = 0.63, P < 0.01 
 
 
Selected population 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN 
 
 
 
Hamel BCJ; 
 
Year: 1982 
 
Country: 
Tanzania 
 
64 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
 
 
Newborn babies with clinical jaundice 
admitted for various reasons to neonatal 
unit of a medical centre 
 
n = 70 
Mean BW: Not reported 
GA: Range 30 to 42 weeks 
Postnatal age: Range 2 to 14 days 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity: 
Black = 100% 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
Gosset Icterometer reading by 
blanching the gum 
 
Reference standard: Blood drawn 
for laboratory TSB levels at the 
same time 
 
 
 
 
Correlation of Icterometer readings with lab 
TSB levels (Pearson correlation coefficient) 
 
r = 0.91, P < 0.01 
 
 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test not 
described in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out simultaneously (exact 
timing not specified) 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN 
  
 
Chaibva NT; 
 
Year: 1974 
 
Country: 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
Newborn babies with clinical jaundice 
 
n = 55 infants and 125 readings 
 
BW: Range 1050 to 3925 g 
 
Gosset Icterometer reading (site not 
specified) 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels (timing not specified) 
 
Correlation of Icterometer readings with lab 
TSB levels (Pearson correlation coefficient) 
 
r = 0.96, P < 0.001 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test not 
described in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out at same time (exact timing 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
229 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Rhodesia 
 
63 
 
 
 
 
GA: Not reported 
Postnatal age: Range 2 to 24 days 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity: 
Black = 100% 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
 
 
 
 
not specified) 
Blinding – yes 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN 
 
 
 
Briscoe L; 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: 
UK 
 
46 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Babies > 34 weeks who were having 
blood taken for any reason, mostly done 
for clinical jaundice. 
 
n = 303 
median BW 3267 g - range 1800–5008 
median GA 39 weeks - range 34–42 
median age at presentation: 3 – range 0 to 
13 days 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
White: 94.7% 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
300 micromol/litre = 3.3% (10/303) 
 
Exclusion: babies who had previously 
received phototherapy 
 
TcB reading using Minolta JM-102 
at the forehead 
(mean of 3 readings used for 
analysis) 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels measured concurrently 
 
For diagnostic accuracy: 
Area under ROC curve calculated 
for detecting TSB 
> 249 micromol/litre 
 
 
 
Correlation of JM-102 with lab TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 303) 
 
r = 0.76, P < 0.0001 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of JM-102 for detecting 
TSB > 249 micromol/litre (n = 303) 
 
Area under ROC = 0.89 
 
Predictive accuracy of JM-102 value 19.9 
(highest accuracy from ROC curve) 
Sensitivity: 86% (81–89%) 
Specificity: 78% (73–83%) 
PPV: Not reported 
NPV: Not reported 
 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN 
 
 
Carbonell X; 
 
Year: 2001 
 
Country: 
Spain 
 
26 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Healthy term babies 
 
n = 2004 – 610 in phase one ± 1394 in 
phase 2 
mean BW 3230 ± 491 g 
mean GA 39 weeks 
Gender: Males = 50.7% 
 
Ethnicity 
Not reported 
 
In first phase (n = 610), cord blood 
bilirubin (UCB) at birth and TcB with 
Minolta JM-102 measured at 24 hours, 
48 hours & 60–96 hours of life. 
Additionally TSB was done for all at 60–
96 hours. On 169 babies TSB also 
measured at 24 & 48hours 
 
Test: 
1. Umbilical cord blood bilirubin 
(UCB) measured at birth (threshold 
value: ≥ 37 micromol/litre) 
ROC curve used to find the best 
cut-off value of UCB. 
 
2. TSB (in phase 1 & 2) and TcB 
(phase 1 only) measured at 
24 hours (threshold value for 
TSB = 102 micromol/litre and for 
TcB > 11) 
 
3. TSB and TcB (in phase 1 & 2) 
measured at 48 hours (threshold 
value for TSB = 154 micromol/litre 
and for TcB > 13) 
 
TcB reading using Minolta JM-102 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels for Sternal vs Forehead site (Pearson 
correlation coefficient) 
 
At < 24 hours (n = 120) 
Sternum Forehead 
0.81 0.77 
 
At 24–48 hours (n = 126) 
Sternum Forehead 
0.89 0.83 
 
At > 48 hours (n = 412) 
Sternum Forehead 
0.94 0.83 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB for detecting 
TSB > 222 micromol/litre 
 
 
Unselected population but no 
exclusion criterion 
Test & Reference test described 
in detail 
Reference test a standard one 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
230 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
In second phase (n = 1394), TcB and lab 
TSB values obtained to find accuracy of 
TSB and TcB at 24hours and 48 hours to 
predict hyperbilirubinaemia. 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
290 micromol/litre = 2.9% in phase 1 
(18/610) and 3.25% in phase 2 (46/1324) 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
at the forehead and the sternum 
(mean of 3 measurements recorded 
at each site used for analysis) 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB measured on Day 3 - 4 
 
TSB = 290 micromol/litre taken as 
indicative of 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Sensitivity: 98% 
Specificity: 72% 
 
Diagnostic accuracy for predicting 
TSB = 290 micromol/litre 
 
Prevalence of TSB = 290 micromol/litre 
2.9% in phase 1 (18/610) and 3.25% in 
phase 2 (46/1324) 
 
1. For UCB 
(threshold = 37 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 4/18 (22.2%) 
Specificity: 537/567 (94.7%) 
PPV: 4/34 (11.7%) 
NPV: 537/551 (97.4%) 
 
2. At 24 hours 
For TcB in phase 1 (threshold > 11 
Reflectance Units) 
Sensitivity: 15/18 (83.3%) 
Specificity: 368/556 (66.2%) 
PPV: 15/203 (7.4%) 
NPV: 368/371 (99.2%) 
 
For TSB in phase 1 
(threshold = 102 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 7/7 (100%) 
Specificity: 74/162 (45.7%) 
PPV: 7/95 (7.4%) 
NPV:74/74 (100%) 
 
For TSB in phase 2 
(threshold = 102 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 25/25 (100%) 
Specificity: 239/398 (60%) 
PPV: 25/95 (26.3%) 
NPV: 239/239 (100%) 
 
2. At 48 hours 
For TcB in phase 1 (threshold > 13 
reflectance units) 
Sensitivity: 17/18 (94.4%) 
Specificity: 288/556 (51.7%) 
PPV: 
NPV: 
 
For TcB in phase 2 (threshold > 13 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
231 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
reflectance units) 
Sensitivity: 45/46 (97.8%) 
Specificity: 262/819 (32.0%) 
PPV: 45/602 (7.5%) 
NPV: 262/263 (99.6%) 
 
For TSB in phase 1 
(threshold = 154 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 11/11 (100%) 
Specificity: 102/158 (64.6%) 
PPV: 11/67 (16.4%) 
NPV: 101/102 (100%) 
 
For TSB in phase 2 
(threshold = 154 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 45/46 (97.8%) 
Specificity: 348/774 (45%) 
PPV: 45/471 (9.5%) 
NPV: 348/349 (99.7%) 
 
 
Knudsen A; 
 
Year: 1989 
 
Country: Denmark 
 
70 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence 
Level:III 
 
 
Babies in a newborn nursery were 
eligible if a visible jaundice was noted in 
first 5 days of life 
 
n = 76, 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Median GA: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: 
Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
 
Test: 
TcB reading from the forehead 
using JM-102 
 
Reference standard: 
Laboratory TSB method measured 
on blood collected at the same time 
as TcB. 
 
 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 76) 
 
Forehead 
r = 0.83; P < 0.0001 
 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test not 
described in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
No demographic details 
reported 
 
 
Karrar Z; 
 
Year: 1989 
 
Country: 
Saudi Arabia 
 
69 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
 
 
Healthy term babies with visible jaundice 
aged between 4 and 10 days. 
 
n = 155 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
Saudi 100% 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-101 on the 
forehead – single measurement 
made 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels at the same time as TcB 
measured 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 155) 
 
r = 0.82, P < 0.01 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 21 reflectance units) for detecting TSB > 
214 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 36/49 (73.5%) 
Specificity: 95/106 (89.6%) 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test not 
described in detail 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
232 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
214 micromol/litre = 31.6% (49/155) 
 
Exclusion: 
preterm infants, 
ill newborns, 
those requiring phototherapy or exchange 
transfusion 
 
PPV: 36/47 (76.6%) 
NPV: 95/108 (88.0%) 
 
 
 
Maisels MJ; 
 
Year: 1982 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
68 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Randomly selected full term White 
babies in a well-baby nursery 
 
n = 157 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
Not reported 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
221 micromol/litre = 7/157 (4.5%) 
 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-102 from 
the forehead and the sternum 
 
Measurements routinely made on 
the 3rd day except in 11 infants 
where earlier sampling done 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels at the same time as TcB 
measured 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient) 
 
At forehead (157 observations) 
r = 0.93, P < 0.0001 
 
At mid-sternum (135 observations) 
r = 0.93, P < 0.0001 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (Sternum 
threshold value > 23 reflectance units) for 
detecting TSB > 221 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 4/4 (100%) 
Specificity: 126/131 (96.2%) 
PPV: 4/9 (44.4%) 
NPV: 126/126 (100%) 
 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (Forehead 
threshold value > 24 reflectance units) for 
detecting TSB > 221 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 7/7 (100%) 
Specificity: 145/150 (96.7%) 
PPV: 7/12 (58.3%) 
NPV: 145/145 (100%) 
 
No exclusion criterion 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 
 
Tsai LT; 
 
Year: 1988 
 
Country: 
Taiwan 
 
67 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
 
 
Term healthy babies > 37 weeks and less 
than 7 days old who had jaundice or TSB 
measurement 
 
n = 98 
paired observations from each of the 8 
sites = 178 
mean BW: Not reported 
mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-102 
 
Measurements made at the time of 
sampling from 8 sites – forehead, 
cheek, sternum, abdomen, upper 
back, lower back, palm and sole. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels at the same time as TcB 
measured 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 178) 
 
Forehead 
r = 0.87, P < 0.001 
 
Cheek 
r = 0.76, P < 0.001 
 
Sternum 
 
No exclusion criterion 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
233 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Ethnicity 
Chinese (100%) 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
222 micromol/litre = 19.6% (35/178 – 
site forehead) 
 
r = 0.78, P < 0.001 
 
For all other sites 
r from 0.47 to 0.76 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 16 relectance units) for detecting TSB > 
222 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 19/21 (90.5%) 
Specificity: 141/157 (89.8%) 
PPV: 19/35 (54.3%) 
NPV: 141/143 (98.6%) 
 
Maisels MJ; 
 
Year: 2004 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
71 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Convenience sample of newborn babies 
≥ 35 weeks in the well-baby nursery of 3 
hospitals. 
 
n = 849 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
white = 59.2% 
black = 29.8% 
other = 10.9% 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
257 micromol/litre = 3.3% (28/849) 
 
Exclusion: babies who had received 
phototherapy 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-103 from 
the mid-sternum 
 
Triplicate measurements made in 
two hospitals while only single 
made in the third, but single TcB 
measurement taken for each baby 
for data analysis. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 1 hour of TcB 
measurement 
 
Area under ROC curve (AROC) 
calculated for detecting TSB > 170, 
222 and 255 micromol/litre 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels and area under ROC curve (Pearson 
correlation coefficient, AROC for TSB > 
222 micromol/litre) 
 
All infants (n = 849) 
r = 0.91, P < 0.001 
AROC = 0.96 
 
White infants (n = 503) 
r = 0.95, P < 0.001 
AROC = 0.96 
 
Black infants (n = 253) 
r = 0.82, P < 0.001 
AROC = 0.97 
 
Other infants (n = 93) 
r = 0.92, P < 0.001 
AROC = 0.96 
 
% of infants with difference between TSB & 
TcB levels of > 34 micromol/litre 
(overestimation by TcB) 
 
Difference 34 to 50 micromol/litre 
White – 4.0% 
Black – 24.1% 
Others – 5.4% 
 
Difference 51 to 67 micromol/litre 
White – 2.0% 
Black – 10.7% 
Others – 2.2% 
 
No exclusion criterion 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN for different 
thresholds 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
234 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Difference > 68 micromol/litre 
White – 0% 
Black – 6.7% 
Others – 1.1%  
 
Schmidt ET et al.; 
 
Year: 2009 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
73 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Convenience sample of newborn babies 
< 34 weeks in a NICU of 1 hospital. 
 
n = 90 
Range of BW: 370 – 2989 g 
Range GA: 24 – 34 weeks 
Gender: Males = 56.7% 
 
Ethnicity 
white = 11.1% 
black = 18.9% 
hispanic = 70.0% 
 
 
Exclusion: 
Hydrops fetalis 
Severe haemolytic disease 
Non-viable 
Had receive or were receiving 
phototherapy or an exchange transfusion 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-103 from 
the sternum, and included a single 
determination and a device –
calculated mean of 5 
determinations 
TCB was carried out within 45 
minutes of TSB./ 
 
Reference standard: 
Laboratory TSB levels 
 
Sensitivity and specific of TCB 
> 68, 103, 137 micromol/litre 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels 
All groups 
R = 0.88, P < 0.001 
 
Group 1 GA 24 – 28 weeks 
r = 0.92 
 
Group 2 GA 29 – 31 weeks 
r = 0.90 
 
Group 3 GA 32 –34 weeks 
r = 0.79 
 
Bland-Altman analysis for mean difference 
between TCB and TSB 
 Group 1 GA 24 – 28 weeks 
-19 ± 32 micromol/l 
 
Group 2 GA 29 – 31 weeks 
-14 ± 22 micromol/litre 
 
Group 3 GA 32 –34 weeks 
-17 ± 27 micromol/litre 
 
 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 
 
Engle WD; 
 
Year: 2005 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
72 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Term and near term neonates who had 
been discharged from the hospital and 
evaluated during first week postnatally in 
a follow-up centre. 
 
n = 121 
median BW: 3280 g – range 2265 to 
4590 
median GA: 40 weeks – range 35 to 41 
median age at TSB: 91 hours – range 51 
to 166 
Gender: Males = 56.2%) 
 
Ethnicity 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-103 from 
the sternum – single measurements 
taken. 
 
Reference standard: 
Laboratory TSB levels within 30 
minutes of TcB measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB 
(various thresholds) calculated for 
detecting TSB > 255, > 272, > 290 
and > 306 micromol/litre 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 121) 
 
r = 0.77, P < 0.001 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between TSB and TcB 
 
MD = 27 micromol/litre 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 205 micromol/litre for detecting TSB > 
255 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion criterion not defined 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
235 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Hispanic = 92% 
Black = 3% 
Asian = 3% 
White = 2% 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
255 micromol/litre = 47% (57/121) 
 
Exclusion: not defined  
 
Sensitivity: 52/57 (91.2%) 
Specificity: 34/64 (53.1%) 
PPV: 52/82 (63.4%) 
NPV: 34/39 (87.2%) 
 
Sanpavat S; 
 
Year: 2004 
 
Country: 
Thailand 
 
74 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Term and near term clinically healthy 
neonates ≥ 36 weeks with visible 
jaundice which necessitated TSB 
determination. 
 
n = 388 
mean BW 3117 ± 425 g 
mean GA: Not reported 
Postnatal age: range 11 to 216 hours 
Gender: Males = 57.5% 
 
Ethnicity 
Not reported 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
255 micromol/litre = 2.8% (13/460) 
 
Exclusion: babies receiving phototherapy 
or already received exchange transfusion 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-103 from 
the forehead 
 
Mean of three measurements taken 
for data analysis. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 10–15 minutes 
of TcB measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB 
(various thresholds) calculated for 
detecting TSB > 170, > 204, > 222 
and > 255 micromol/litre 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 460 observations) 
 
r = 0.80, P < 0.001 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between TSB and TcB 
 
MD = 12 micromol/litre (95% CI 9.4 to 
14.5) 
SD = 27.4micromol/litre 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 205 micromol/litre) for detecting TSB > 
255 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 13/14 (92.9%) 
Specificity: 373/446 (83.6$) 
PPV: 13/86 (15.1%) 
NPV: 373/374 (99.7%) 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 
 
Sanpavat S; 
 
Year: 2007 
 
Country: 
Thailand 
 
75 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Clinically healthy preterm babies with 
BW > 1000 g and GA < 36 weeks with 
visible jaundice which necessitated TSB 
determination. 
 
n = 196 
mean BW 1887 ± 344.4 g 
mean GA 33.2 ± 1.7 weeks, postnatal 
age: 108 ± 77 hours 
Gender: Males = 55% 
 
Ethnicity 
Not reported 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-103 from 
the forehead 
 
Mean of three measurements taken 
for data analysis. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 1 hour of TcB 
measurement 
 
Percentage of TcB readings which 
overestimated (TcB > 10% of TSB) 
or underestimated (TcB < 10% of 
TSB) 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 249 observations) 
 
r = 0.79, P < 0.0001 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between TSB and TcB 
 
MD = -5.0 micromol/litre (95% CI -1.7 to -
8.5) 
SD = 25.5 micromol/litre 
 
Comparison of TcB readings with TSB 
levels at different postnatal ages (n = 249) 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
236 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Total paired (TcB-TSB) 
observations = 249 
 
Exclusion: babies receiving phototherapy 
or already received exchange transfusion 
 
Day 1–2 (n = 67) 
Overestimate = 47.8% 
Underestimate = 14.9% 
 
Day 3–4 (n = 103) 
Overestimate = 34.0% 
Underestimate = 13.6% 
 
Day 5–7 (n = 45) 
Overestimate = 20.0% 
Underestimate = 28.9% 
 
> 7 day (n = 34) 
Overestimate = 17.6% 
Underestimate = 35.3% 
 
 
Chang YH; 
 
Year: 2006 
 
Country: 
Taiwan 
 
76 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Healthy term and near term babies born 
in a tertiary hospital. 
 
n = 447 
mean BW 3185 ± 399.9 g 
mean GA 38.6 ± 1.3 weeks 
Postnatal age: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 51.2% 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
255 micromol/litre = 15% (67/447) 
 
Exclusion: not defined 
 
TcB using Minolta JM-103 
 
Three measurements made from the 
forehead, right and left side of the 
anterior chest wall, and their mean 
taken for data analysis. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 1 hour of TcB 
measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy calculated for 
detecting TSB > 255 micromol/litre 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 447) 
 
r = 0.83, P < 0.0001 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between TSB and TcB 
 
MD = -17 micromol/litre (95% CI 15.3 to 
20.4) 
SD = 27.2micromol/litre 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 200 micromol/litre) for detecting TSB > 
255 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 53/67 (79.1%) 
Specificity: 301/380 (79.2%) 
PPV: 53/132 (40.1%) 
NPV: 301/315 (95.6%) 
 
 
No exclusion criterion 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
 
 
 
Rubaltelli FF; 
 
Year: 2001 
 
Country: 
Europe (multicentre 
study in UK, Germany, 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
Ib 
 
 
 
Term and preterm neonates who 
underwent TSB tests as part of normal 
care at 6 European Hospitals. 
 
n = 210 with 35 babies from each 
hospital 
BW: < 2500 g = 16.3% 
 
TcB using BiliChek from the 
forehead and sternum – single 
measurement taken from each site. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 30 minutes of 
TcB measurement 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 210) 
 
Forehead 
r = 0.87, P < 0.001 
 
 
Unselected population but 
exclusion criterion not defined 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
237 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
France, Italy, 
Switzerland) 
 
77 
 
 
GA: > 36 week = 80.2% 
Postnatal age: < 48 hours = 16.3% 
Gender: Not reported 
 
Ethnicity 
White = 66.7% 
Asian = 14.8% 
Hispanic = 6.7% 
Other = 11.9% 
 
Exclusion: not defined  
 
Blood sample also collected for 
TSB estimation using HPLC-B 
technique at the same time 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB 
(various thresholds) estimated at 
various thresholds and plotted on 
ROC curve. 
 
Sternum 
r = 0.85, P < 0.001 
 
Correlation of lab TSB levels with TSB 
levels using HPLC-B 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 210) 
 
r = 0.93, P < 0.001 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between lab TSB and TcB 
 
Forehead 
MD = +2.4 micromol/litre (95% CI -2.4 to 
+7.1) 
SD = 35.4 micromol/litre 
 
Sternum 
MD = -14.8 micromol/litre (95% CI -19.9 to 
+9.5) 
SD = 38.4 micromol/litre 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB on forehead 
(threshold 187 micromol/litre) for detecting 
TSB > 222 micromol/litre by HLPC-B 
 
Sensitivity: 93% 
Specificity: 73% 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold 
238 micromol/litre) for detecting TSB > 
290 micromol/litre by HLPC-B 
 
Sensitivity: 90% 
Specificity: 87% 
 
 
 
 
Boo NY; 
 
Year: 2007 
 
Country: 
Malaysia 
 
78 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
Ib 
 
 
 
Healthy term Malaysian babies with 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
n = 345 
mean BW: 3056 ± 487 g, 
median GA 38 weeks 
postnatal age: range 9 – 388 
Gender: Males = 60% 
 
Ethnicity 
Malays = 63.8% 
 
TcB using BiliChek from the 
forehead and midpoint of sternum – 
number of measurements from each 
site not specified 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 30 minutes of 
TcB measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB 
(various thresholds) calculated for 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 345) 
 
Forehead 
All babies 
r = 0.80, P < 0.0001 
Malays: r = 0.79, P < 0.0001 
Chinese: r = 0.84, P < 0.0001 
Indians: r = 0.83, P < 0.0001 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes 
Data not given for the mean 
difference and SD from Bland 
Altman analysis for TSB – TcB 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
238 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Chinese = 30.7% 
Indians = 5.5%, 
 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
300 micromol/litre = 27.5% (95/345) 
 
Exclusion: infants who had received 
phototherapy or exchange transfusion, 
congenital anomalies, 
severely ill, 
foreigners, 
those with conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia. 
detecting TSB > 250, > 280, and 
> 300 micromol/litre 
 
Sternum 
All babies 
r = 0.86, P < 0.0001 
Malays: r = 0.86, P < 0.0001 
Chinese: r = 0.86, P < 0.0001 
Indians: r = 0.94, P < 0.0001 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels depending on the time of 
measurement 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, 79% of 
infants with TSB > 300 had measurement at 
> 80 hours) 
 
At < 80 hours 
r = 0.85, P < 0.001 
 
At > 80 hours 
r = 0.71, P < 0.001 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB for detecting 
TSB > 300 micromol/litre 
 
Forehead (threshold 250 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 100% 
Specificity: 39.2% 
 
Forehead (threshold 260 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 75.8% 
Specificity: 84.8% 
 
Sternum (threshold 200 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 100% 
Specificity: 33.6% 
 
Sternum (threshold 280 micromol/litre) 
Sensitivity: 92.6% 
Specificity: 84% 
 
 
Ebbesen F; 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: 
Denmark 
 
45 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
 
 
All newborns more than 24 hours old 
who for clinical reasons had their plasma 
bilirubin determination during the day, 
except at weekends. 
 
Group 1: Both preterm infants 
< 35 weeks and sick term and near-term 
infants in the NICU 
 
TcB measurement using BiliChek 
from forehead, sternum, knee and 
the foot – mean of 5 measurements 
from each site taken for data 
analysis. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels taken concurrently with 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 210) 
 
Group 1: 
Forehead 
r = 0.88, p > 0.05 
Sternum 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 
Data not given for the mean 
difference and SD from Bland 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
239 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
 
 
n = 261 
mean BW 2521 g - range 680 to 4645 g, 
mean GA 34.6 weeks - range 25 to 
43 weeks postnatal age at 1st TcB: 98.4 - 
range 48 – 840 
Gender: Males = 60.1% 
 
Ethnicity: 
Non-northern European descent = 9% 
 
 
Group 2: Healthy term and near-term 
infants with GA ≥ 35 weeks in the 
maternity ward 
 
n = 227 
mean BW 3362 g - ange 2170 to 5000 g 
mean GA 38.6 weeks - range 35 to 
43 weeks 
postnatal age at 1st TcB: 74.4 - range 48 
– 360 Gender: Males = 55.5% 
 
Ethnicity: 
Non-northern European descent = 7% 
 
Exclusion: 
babies already receiving phototherapy or 
who received phototherapy 6 hours 
before TSB measurement, 
with skin infection, 
purpura, 
bruising 
TcB measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB from 
forehead (threshold ≥ 0.70 of 
phototherapy limit) estimated for 
predicting TSB levels ≥ 
phototherapy limits as suggested by 
the Danish Pediatric Society 
 
r = 0.82, P < 0.001 
Knee 
r = 0.77, P < 0.001 
Foot 
r = 0.51, P < 0.001 
 
On comparing correlation coefficient of 
forehead with that for sternum, knee and 
foot, P < 0.001 for each of the comparison 
 
Group 2: 
Forehead 
r = 0.87, p > 0.05 
Sternum 
r = 0.90, P < 0.05 
Knee 
r = 0.83, P < 0.05 
Foot 
r = 0.67, P < 0.001 
 
On comparing correlation coefficient of 
forehead with that for sternum, knee and 
foot, P < 0.05 for comparison with knee and 
foot only 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 0.70 times the phototherapy limit) from 
forehead in detecting TSB > phototherapy 
limit 
 
Group 1 (n = 504 observations): 
Sensitivity: 108/109 (99.1%) 
Specificity: 177/395 (44.8%) 
PPV: 108/326 (33.1%) 
NPV: 177/178 (99.4%) 
 
Group 2 (n = 317 observations): 
Sensitivity: 3/3 (100%) 
Specificity: 254/314 (80.9%) 
PPV: 3/63 (4.8%) 
NPV: 254/254 (100%) 
Altman analysis for TSB - TcB 
 
 
Samanta S; 
 
Year: 2004 
 
Country: 
UK 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
All babies > 33 weeks in the postnatal 
ward of a regional teaching hospital who 
were due to have blood taken for TSB 
estimation 
 
n = 300 
 
TcB using BiliChek (site not 
specified) – single measurement 
taken. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels taken concurrently with 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 300) 
 
r = 0.77, P < 0.0001 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – not specified 

Neonatal jaundice 
240 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
44 
 
 
 median BW 3295 g – range 1972 to 4720 
median GA 39 weeks – range 33 to 42 
median postnatal age: 72 hours – range 
24 to 264 
Gender: Males = 50% 
 
Prevalence of TSB > 
250 micromol/litre = 55/300 (18.3%) 
 
Exclusion: babies who had previously 
received phototherapy 
TcB measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB 
(various thresholds) estimated by 
plotting ROC curve. 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between lab TSB and TcB 
 
MD = -10.6 micromol/litre (95% CI -80.0 to 
+60.0) 
SD = Not reported 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 195 micromol/litre) for detecting TSB > 
250 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 50/55 (90.9%) 
Specificity: 162/245 (66.1%) 
PPV: 50/133 (37.6%) 
NPV: 162/167 (97%) 
 
 
 
De Luca D; 
 
Year: 2007 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
79 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
Ib 
 
 
 
Preterm babies with GA between 30–
36 weeks admitted in the neonatal sub-
intensive unit of tertiary hospital. 
 
n = 340 
mean BW 2145 ± 518 g 
mean GA 33.5 ± 1.9 weeks 
mean postnatal age: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 48.2% 
 
Exclusion: 
babies receiving phototherapy or 
exchange transfusion, 
asphyxia (Apgar score < 7 at 5 min), 
Rh or major ABO incompatibility, 
conjugated bilirubin 
> 17.1 micromol/litre, 
congenital malformation, 
liver disease. 
 
TcB using BiliChek from the 
forehead – mean of 5 
measurements taken for data 
analysis. 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels within 10 minutes of 
TcB measurement 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB 
estimated by plotting ROC curve 
and results given for best 
thresholds 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient, 
n = 210) 
 
r = 0.79, P < 0.001 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between mean lab TSB and mean TcB 
% with difference 
> 8.55 micromol/litre = 61.5% (209/340) 
MD = -18.8 micromol/litre 
SD = 34.2 micromol/litre 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 111 micromol/litre) for detecting TSB > 
171 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 100% 
Specificity: 40% 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
> 171 micromol/litre) for detecting TSB > 
205 micromol/litre 
 
Sensitivity: 100% 
Specificity: 72%  
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes but only 
investigator 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN for detecting 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
 
 
Karon B; 
 
Year: 2008 
 
Country: USA 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
Babies in a well-infant nursery were 
eligible if a serum bilirubin was ordered 
to assess risk of hyperbilirubinaemia. 
 
n = 177 
 
Test: 
TcB reading from the forehead 
using BiliChek – mean of 5 
measurements taken for data 
analysis 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with TSB levels 
(Pearson correlation coefficient, n = 177) 
 
Forehead 
Diazo: r² = 0.65 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
241 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
 
81 
 
 
 Mean BW: Not reported 
Median GA: 39.9 weeks (32.7 to 41.4) 
Gender: Not reported 
Ethnicity: 
White = 82.5% 
Black = 1.7% 
Hispanic = 5.1% 
Asian = 10.7% 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
 
Reference standard: 
1.Laboratory TSB diazo method 
measured on blood collected within 
30 minutes as TcB. 
 
2. Laboratory TSB VITROS 
method measured on blood 
collected within 30 minutes as TcB. 
 
 
VITROS: r² = 0.66 
 
 
Diagnostic accuracy of TcB (threshold value 
>75 centile on Bhutani nomogram 
 
Diazo: 
Sensitivity: 56/57 (98.2%) 
Specificity: 48/120 (40%) 
PPV: 56/127 (43.7%) 
NPV: 48/49 (98%) 
 
Vitros: 
Sensitivity: 63/67 (94%) 
Specificity: 35/64 (54.7%) 
PPV: 63/92 (68.5%) 
NPV: 35/39 (89.7%) 
 
Blinding – No 
 
 
 
Slusher TM; 
 
Year: 2004 
 
Country: 
Nigeria 
 
80 
 
 
 
Study Type: 
Diagnostic study 
 
Evidence Level: 
II 
 
 
 
Clinically jaundiced term and preterm 
babies with age < 14 days admitted in 
two hospitals 
 
n = 127 
mean BW: 2.72 ± 0.62 kg 
mean GA: Not reported 
Gender: Males = 60%, 
 
Pigmentation – 
dark pigmentation 10% 
medium pigmentation = 36% 
light pigmentation = 54% 
 
Hospital A: 500-bed tertiary teaching 
hospital (n = 98) 
 
Hospital B: 168-bed hospital located in a 
rural village (n = 29) 
 
 
Exclusion: not defined  
 
TcB using BiliChek from the 
forehead and before starting 
phototherapy 
 
Skin pigmentation determined 
through visual observation 
 
Reference standard: Laboratory 
TSB levels obtained 
simultaneously with TcB 
measurement 
 
 
 
Correlation of TcB levels with lab TSB 
levels (Pearson correlation coefficient) 
 
Both hospital together 
r = 0.92 
Babies with TSB ≥ 205 micromol/litre 
r = 0.84 
Babies with TSB < 205 micromol/litre 
r = 0.67 
 
Based on pigmentation 
Light: r = 0.91 
Medium: r = 0.94 
Dark: r = 0.87 
 
Bland Altman analysis for difference 
between mean TcB and mean lab TSB 
values 
 
Both hospitals together 
MD = 8.5 micromol/litre (95% CI -3.4 to 
21.4 micromol/litre 
SD = 129.2 micromol/litre 
 
Babies with TSB ≥ 205 micromol/litre 
MD = --21.4 micromol/litre (95% CI -40.8 
to 0.0 micromol/litre) 
SD = 146.2 micromol/litre 
 
 
Unselected population 
Test & Reference test described 
adequately 
Test and reference test carried 
out within one hour 
Blinding – yes but only 
investigator 
Data not extractable for 
calculating values of TP, FP, 
TN & FN for detecting hyperbil 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
242 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Test, Reference Standard, 
Threshold for a positive test 
Results Reviewers Comments 
Babies with TSB < 205 micromol/litre 
MD = 35.7 micromol/litre (95% CI 25.5 to 
45.9 micromol/litre) 
SD = 129.2 micromol/litre 
 
Based on pigmentation 
Light: MD = 18.4 micromol/litre, 
SD = 91.8 micromol/litre 
 
Medium: MD = 13.6 micromol/litre, 
SD = 132.6 micromol/litre 
 
Dark: MD = -3.4 micromol/litre, 
SD = 197.2 micromol/litre 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
243 
What should be included in a formal assessment of a baby with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
 
Evidence Table – Assessment Tests 
TSB < 255micromol/litre 
 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Author: Werblinska B 
 
Year: 1981 
 
Country: Nigeria 
 
Ref ID: 83 
Study type: 
Case–control study 
 
Evidence level: 2- 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 171 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 40 
GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported. 
Gender M/F: 19/21 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 253 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 8/40 (20%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 3/40 (7.5%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 13/40 (32.5%) 
P value < 0.001 
 
Infection: 34/40 (85%) 
 P value < 0.001 
 
Idiopathic: 3/40 (7.5) 
Small study, 
 
Incomplete data from three subject so 
not included in analysis 
 
All 38controls (14 M & 24 F) were 
delivered by Caesarean Section due to 
maternal complication 
 
Author: Azubuike J 
 
Year: 1979 
 
Country: Nigeria 
 
Ref ID: 82 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 170 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
Sample Size: 424 
GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Days 0 – 10 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 178/424 (41.2%) 
 
Rh incompatibility:2/424 (0.5%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 
229/424 (54%) 
 
Infection: 60/424 (14.1%) 
 
Idiopathic: 39/424 (9.2%) 
 
 
Author: Guaran R 
 
Year: 1992 
 
Country: Australia 
 
Ref ID: 89 
Study type: 
Retrospective chart 
review 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 154 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 10944 
GA: Not reported. 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None (4,815 Not investigated) 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 601/6129 (9.8%) 
 
Rh incompatibility:193/6129 (3.1%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 
51/6129 (0.8%) 
 
Infection: 198/6129 (3.2%) 
 
Exchange Transfusion (n = 248) 
ABO incompatibility: 58/248 (23.4%) 
4815 cases had no investigations 
Preterm birth is reported to be the 
most common cause 2226/61290 
(36.3%) 

Neonatal jaundice 
244 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Rh incompatibility: 108/248 (43.5%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 
2/248 (0.8%) 
 
Infection: 2/248 (0.8%) 
 
Author: Sodeinde O 
 
Year: 1995 
 
Country: Nigeria 
 
Ref ID: 85 
Study type: 
Case control study 
 
Evidence level: 2- 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 205 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 327 
Mean GA: Not reported. 87 (26.5%) were preterm 
< 37 weeks 
Mean BW: 2.73 ± 0.74 kg 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 40/150 (26.7%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 3/150 (2.0%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 109/327 (33.3%) (P value 
< 0.0087) 
 
Infection: 38/217 (17.5%) 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
Not all subjects tested for ABO 
incompatibility or infection 
 
Author: Yeung C 
 
Year: 1973 
 
Country: China 
 
Ref ID: 90 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 171 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 1811 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported. 65 (3.6%) were preterm 
< 38 weeks 
Gender M/F: 1054/755 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 10 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 414/1811(22.8%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: Not reported 
 
G6PD deficiency: 241/1811 (13.3) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
 
 
Exchange transfusion (n = 581) 
ABO incompatibility: 157/581 (27.0%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 13/581 (22.4%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
 
Kernicterus (n = 156) 
ABO incompatibility: 51/156 (32.7%) 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
245 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
 
G6PD deficiency: 58/156 (37.2%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
 
Author: Bhandari A 
 
Year: 1982 
 
Country: India 
 
Ref ID: 86 
Study type: 
Case control study 
 
Evidence level: 2- 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 171 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 100 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 58/42 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 5 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 10/100 (10.0%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 20/100 (20.0%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 4/100 (4.0%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
 
 
Author: Bajpai P 
 
Year: 1971 
 
Country: India 
 
Ref ID: 87 
Study type: 
Case control study 
 
Evidence level: 2- 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 205 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 50 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 8/50 (16.0%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/50 (2.0%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 2/50 (4.0%) 
 
Infection: 7/50 (14.0%) 
 
Idiopathic: 19/50 (38%) 
 
Author: Arif K 
 
Year: 1999 
 
Country: Pakistan 
 
Ref ID: 88 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: None 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 869 
Mean GA: 37.2 ± 2.8 weeks 
Mean BW: 27574 ± 735 g 
Gender M/F: 484/385 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 221 ± 42 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 56/869 (6.4%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 57/869 (6.6%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 20/869 (2.3%) 
 
Infection: 165/869 (19.0%) 
 
Exchange transfusion 
ABO incompatibility: 4/27 (14.8%) 
 
Retrospective study 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
246 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Rh incompatibility: 7/27 (25.9%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 2/27 (7.4%) 
 
Infection: 6/27 (22.2%) 
 
 
Author: Singhal P 
 
Year: 1992 
 
Country: India 
 
Ref ID: 84 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Hyperbilirubinaemia 
Criteria: TsB > 205 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 454 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 258/196 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 65/454 (14.3%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 37/454 (8.1%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 23/454 (5.1%) 
 
Exchange transfusion 
ABO incompatibility: 18/66 (27.4%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 21/66 (31.8%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 11/66 (16.7%) 
From 7680 live births 454 (5.9%) has 
TsB > 205 micromol/litre 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
247 
Evidence Table – Assessment Tests 
TSB 255 – 399 micromol/litre 
 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Author: Biddulph J 
 
Year: 1974 
 
Country: Papua New 
Guinea 
 
Ref ID: 95 
Study type: 
Consecutive case-
series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 256 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 50 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F:29/21 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: 50 (100%) 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 1 - 17 
Duration of jaundice: 26 (52%) < 1 week 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
Incidence of ABO incompatibility: 12/50 (24%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: Not reported 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 11/50 (22%) 
 
Incidence of sepsis: 8/50 (16%) 
 
Idiopathic: 19/50 (38%) 
 
Exchange transfusion (n = 11) 
Incidence of ABO incompatibility: 4/11 (36.4%) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 3/11 (27.3%) 
 
Incidence of sepsis: 2/11 (18.2%) 
 
Idiopathic: 2/11 (18.2%) 
 
Small study 
 
 
Author: Seidman D 
 
Year: 1995 
 
Country: Israel 
 
Ref ID: 93 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 308 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 21 
Mean GA: 39.3 ± 1.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 3206 ± 340 gms 
Gender M/F: 15/6 
Ethnicity: 9 Jew Askenazi, 3 Kurdish, 2 Iraqi and others. 
Breastfeeding: 20/21 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 10 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 335 ± 43 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 0/21 (0%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 0/21 (0%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 2/21 (9.5%) 
 
Infection: 0/21 (0%) 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
Small study 
 
Subjects had received phototherapy 
and were discharged with TSB 
> 171 micromol/litre so could qualify 
as persistent jaundice 
 
Author: Effiong C 
 
Year: 1975 
 
Country: Nigeria 
 
Ref ID: 94 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 256 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 125 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 70/55 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 26/125 (20.6%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 2/125 (1.6%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
248 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: 
Onset of Jaundice: Days 0 – 7 
Duration of jaundice: 
 
Exclusion: None 
49/125 (39.2%) 
 
Infection: 1/125 (0.8%) 
 
Idiopathic: 35/125 (28%) 
 
Exchange Transfusion (n = 53) 
ABO incompatibility: 15/53 (20.6%) 
 
Rh incompatibility:1/53 (1.9%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 
21/53 (39.6%) 
 
Infection: 0/53 (0%) 
 
Idiopathic: 11/53 (20.7%) 
Author: Ho K 
 
Year: 1991 
 
Country: Singapore 
 
Ref ID: 96 
Study type: 
Retrospective chart 
review 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 256 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 270 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 73/270 (27.0%) 
 
Rh incompatibility:1/270 (0.4%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 18/270 (6.7%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
 
Exchange Transfusion (n = 46) 
ABO incompatibility: 17/46 (37.0%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/46 (2.2%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 
2/46 (4.3%) 
 
Infection: 8/46 (17.4%) 
 
Idiopathic: 6/46(13.0%) 
Authors report a drop in number of 
G6PD cases requiring exchange 
transfusion on new guidelines that 
specified that G6PD be screened for at 
birth and deficient babies be kept in 
hospital for a minimum of 2 weeks 
 
Author: Ahmed H 
 
Year: 1995 
 
Country: Nigeria 
 
Ref ID: 92 
Study type: 
Case control study 
 
Evidence level: 2- 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 171 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 102 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 312 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 24/102 (23.5%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 0/102 (0%) 
 
Incidence of infection higher in babies 
readmitted from home 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
249 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Gender M/F: 65/37 
Ethnicity: Not reported Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
G6PD deficiency: 41/102 (41.2%) 
 
Infection: 57/102 (55.9%) 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
 
Author: Mamtani M 
 
Year: 2007 
 
Country: India 
 
Ref ID: 91 
Study type: 
Cohort 
 
Evidence level: 2- 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 256 micromol/litre if the age of the baby is 
<15 days 
Setting: Tertiary care Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 92 
Mean GA: Not reported. 17 were Preterm 
Mean BW: Not reported: 35 were small for GA 
Gender M/F: 57/35 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: 58 (63%) 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 15 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 376 ± 85 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 14/92 (15.3%) 
 
Rh incompatibility:10/92 (10.9%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 4/92 (4.3%) 
 
Infection: 18/92 (19.6%) 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
 
 
Author: Tay J 
 
Year: 1984 
 
Country: Singapore 
 
Ref ID: 97 
Study type: 
Cohort 
 
Evidence level: 2- 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 222 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 181 
Mean GA: Not reported. 15 were preterm 
Mean BW: Not reported. 25 were less than 2500gms 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 330 ± 51micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 42/181 (23.2%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/181 (0.6%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 4/181 (2.2%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
 
Kernicterus (n = 8) 
ABO incompatibility: 4/8 (50.0%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/8 (12,5) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 
0/8 (0%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
Those with G6PD deficiency kept in 
hospital for 21 days 
 
Author: Chen W 
 
Year: 1981 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 25 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 327 ± 72 micromol/litre 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
250 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
 
Country: Taiwan 
 
Ref ID: 98 
Evidence level: 3  
Sample Size: 196 
Mean GA: Not reported. 
Mean BW: Not reported: 25 had low birthweight 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Chinese 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 15 
 
Exclusion: None 
ABO incompatibility: 61/196(31.1%) 
 
Rh incompatibility:1/196 (0.5%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 43/196(21.9%) 
 
Infection: 10/196 (5.1%) 
 
Idiopathic: 53/196 (17.0%) 
Author: Atay E 
 
Year: 2006 
 
Country: Turkey 
 
Ref ID: 99 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Indirect hyperbilirubinaemia 
Criteria: None 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 624 
Mean GA: Not reported. 
Mean BW: 3082 ± 530 g 
Gender M/F: 330/294 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: 6.57 ± 4.04 days 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 359 ± 70 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 171/624 (27.4%) 
 
Rh incompatibility:52/624 (8.3%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 24/624 (3.8%) 
 
Infection: 36/624 (5.8%) 
 
Idiopathic: 312/624 (50.0%) 
 
 
Kernicterus 
ABO incompatibility: 2/6 (33.3%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/6 (16.6%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 1/6 (16.6%) 
 
Infection: 0/6 (0%) 
 
Idiopathic: 0/6 (0%) 
 
 
Author: Al-Omran A 
 
Year: 1999 
 
Country: Saudi Arabia 
 
Ref ID: 102 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TsB > 256 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 211 
Mean GA: Not reported. 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Saudis (97%) 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 21/211 (9.9%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 2/211 (0.9%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 64/211 (30.3%) 
 
Infection: 4/211 (1.9%) 
 
Idiopathic: 108/211 (51.2%) 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
251 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Exclusion: None  
Author: Dawodu A 
 
Year: 1998 
 
Country: UAE 
 
Ref ID: 101 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: Cockington 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 85 
Mean GA: Not reported. 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: 57 (67%) Arab 
26 (30%) Asian 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 22/85 (25.9%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/85 (1.2%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 8/85 (9.4%) 
 
 
 
 
Author: Koosha A 
 
Year: 2007 
 
Country: Iran 
 
Ref ID: 100 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Hyperbilirubinaemia 
Criteria: ICD 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 376 
Mean GA: Not reported. 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 159/217 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 14/376 (3.7%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 8/376 (2.1%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 8/376 (2.1%) 
 
Infection: 59/376 (15.7%) 
 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
252 
Evidence Table – Assessment Tests 
TSB >400 micromol/litre / or Exchange Transfusion 
 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Author: Nkrumah F 
 
Year: 1973 
 
Country: Ghana 
 
Ref ID: 104 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 342 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital/Paediatric outpatient 
 
Sample Size: 35 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 26/9 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 8 
Duration of jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 551 ± 182 micromol/litre 
 
Incidence of ABO incompatibility: 14/35 (40%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/35 (2.9%) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 13/35 (37.1%) 
 
Incidence of sepsis: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: 10/35 (28.6%) 
 
Kernicterus 
Incidence of ABO incompatibility: 6/17 (35.3%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/17 (5.9%) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 8/17 (47.0%) 
 
Incidence of sepsis: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: 3/17 (17.6%) 
 
Small study 
 
 
 
Author: Manning D 
 
Year: 2007 
 
Country: UK & Republic 
of Ireland 
 
Ref ID: 106 
Study type: 
Survey 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 513 micromol/litre 
Setting: Not reported 
 
Sample Size: 106 
Mean GA: 38.2 ± 1.7 weeks 
Mean BW: 3170 ± 480 gms 
Gender M/F: 64/42 
Ethnicity: White 52 (48.1%), Asian 18 (16.7%), Black 11 
(10.1%), Mixed 11 (10.1%) 
Breastfeeding: 87 (80.5%) 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 581 micromol/litre (510–802) 
 
ABO incompatibility: 33/106 (31.1%) 
 
Rh incompatibility:6/106 (5.7%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 5/106 (4.7%) 
 
Infection: 4/106 (3.8%) 
 
Idiopathic: 29/106 (27.3%) 
 
Kernicterus Cases (n = 14) 
ABO incompatibility: 3/14 (21.4%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 1/14 (7.1%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 3/14 (21.4%) 
 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
253 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Infection: 2/14 (14.3%) 
 
Idiopathic: 1/14 (7.1%) 
Author: Katar S 
 
Year: 2008 
 
Country: Turkey 
 
Ref ID: 107 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB > 342 micromol/litre at 24–48 hours or 
≥ 427 micromol/litre) at > 48 hours after birth 
Setting: Neonatal clinic 
 
Sample Size: 21 
Mean GA: Not reported. All were term babies 
Mean BW: 2943 ± 533 gms 
Gender M/F: 15/6 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 598 ± 185 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 4/21 (19.5) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 4/21 (19.5%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 4/21 (19.5%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: 10/21 (47.5%) 
Small study 
 
Author: Dawodu A 
 
Year: 1984 
 
Country: Nigeria 
 
Ref ID: 105 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 205 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 109 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 77/32 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 616 ± 197 micromol/litre 
: 
ABO incompatibility: 15/109 (13.8%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: Not reported 
 
G6PD deficiency: 67/109 (61.5%) 
 
Infection: 24/109 (22.0%) 
 
Idiopathic: 13/109 (11.9%) 
Only subjects with indication for 
infection were tested 
 
Author: Tiker F 
 
Year: 2006 
 
Country: Turkey 
 
Ref ID: 108 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 428 micromol/litre 
Setting: Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
 
Sample Size: 93 
Mean GA: 38.57 weeks 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 51/42 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: 93/93 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 30 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 515 ± 97 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 7/93 (7.5%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 7/93 (7.5%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 2/39 (5.1%) 
 
Infection: 7/93 (7.5%) 
 
Idiopathic: 61/93 (615.6%) 
 
 
Kernicterus (n = 6) 
ABO incompatibility: 1/6 (16.7%) 
 
Not all babies tested for G6PD levels 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
254 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Rh incompatibility: 0/6 (0%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 1/6 (16.7%) 
 
Infection: 3/6 (50.0%) 
 
Idiopathic: 1/6 (16.7%) 
 
Author: Sgro M 
 
Year: 2006 
 
Country: Canada 
 
Ref ID: 111 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 427 micromol/litre) 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 258 
Mean GA: 38.5 ± 1.4 weeks 
Mean BW: 3360 ± 489 gms 
Gender M/F: 162/96 
Ethnicity: White 55.4%, Asian 24.3%, Aboriginal 7.6%, 
black 5.2%, Middle Eastern 4.0%, Latin American 2.8% 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 60 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: 464 ± 75 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 49/258 (18.9%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: Not reported 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 20/258 (7.7%) 
 
Infection: 3/258 (1.2%) 
 
Idiopathic: Unclear 
 
Author: Bjerre J 
 
Year: 2008 
 
Country: Denmark 
 
Ref ID: 110 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
Criteria: TSB ≥ 445 micromol/litre 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 113 
GA (range): 35 – 42 weeks 
BW (range): 2380 - 4870gms 
Gender M/F: 69/44 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Day 0 - 28 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 52/113 (46.0%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 2/113 (0.2%) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 1/113 (0.9%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: Unclear 
 
 
Author: Necheles T 
 
Year: 1976 
 
Countries: United States & 
Greece 
 
Ref ID: 109 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Severe jaundice requiring exchange transfusions 
Criteria: Not reported 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 75 
GA: Not reported 
BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 69/44 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 29/75 (38.7%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 6/75 (8.0%) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 14/75 (18.7%) 
 
Kernicterus 
ABO incompatibility: 1/6 (16.7%) 
 
66 babies were in Greece and 9 were 
in the USA 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
255 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Exclusion: None Rh incompatibility: 0/6 (0%) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 3/6 (50.0%) 
 
Author: Narang A 
 
Year: 1997 
 
Country: India 
 
Ref ID: 103 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Hyperbilirubinaemia 
Criteria: Exchange transfusion 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 141 
Mean GA: Not reported. 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: 8/141 (5.7%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 13/141 (9.2%) 
 
G6PD deficiency: 24/141 (17.2%) 
 
Infection: 34/141 (24.1%) 
 
Idiopathic: 50/141 (35.4%) 
 
Demographic data reported for all 
babies who received PT/ET 
(Cockington charts) and data Not 
reported for those with serum bilirubin 
> 256 micromol/litre 

Neonatal jaundice 
256 
Evidence Table – Assessment Tests 
Kernicterus 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Author: Maisels J 
 
Year: 1995 
 
Country: USA 
 
Ref ID: 113 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Kernicterus 
Criteria: Not reported 
Setting: Not reported 
Sample Size: 14 
GA (range): 37 – 42 weeks 
BW (range): Not reported) 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: All 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: (Not reported) 
ABO incompatibility: 1/14 (7.1%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 0/14 (0 %) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 3/14 (21.4%) 
 
Infection: 2/14 (14.3%) 
 
Idiopathic: 6/14 (42.8%) 
 
 
Author: Bhutani V 
 
Year: 2006 
 
Country: USA 
 
Ref ID: 20 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Kernicterus 
Criteria: Not reported 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 125 
GA (range): 35 – 42 weeks 
BW (range): 2015 – 4730 gms 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Ethnicity: White (58.4%), Black (26.4%), Hispanic (8.8%) 
and Asian (6.4%) 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels 
TSB: Not reported 
 
ABO incompatibility: Not reported 
 
Rh incompatibility: Not reported 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 26/125 (20.8%) 
 
Infection: Not reported 
 
Idiopathic: 44/125 (35.2%) 
Demographc data reported for all 
cases on Kernicterus Register not just 
the sample used here 
Author: Ogunlesi T 
 
Year: 2007 
 
Country: Nigeria 
 
Ref ID: 112 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Bilirubin Encephalopathy 
Criteria: severe jaundice and tone abnormalities, abnormal 
cry and abnormal movements 
Setting: Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 115 
GA: 97 (84,3%) were term 
BW: ≥ 77 (69.9%) > 500 g 
Gender M/F: 88/27 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: Not reported 
Onset of Jaundice: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: None 
Mean bilirubin levels (unconjugated) 
TSB: 348 ± 113 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 22/115 (19.2%) 
 
Rh incompatibility: 7/115 (6.1%) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 40/115 (34.8%) 
 
Infection: 12/115 (10.4%) 
Also 2 had mixed ABO/Rh 
incompatibilities 
 
4 had mixed ABO incompatibility and 
septicaemia 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
257 
Evidence Table – Additional Tests 
 
 
 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Author: 
Hulzebos C 
 
Year: 
2008 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
Ref ID: 114 
Study type: 
Systematic review 
 
Evidence level: 1++ 
Inclusion criteria 
Studies of Preterm babies with hyperbilirubinaemia that used 
the Bilirubin/Albumin ratio to predict BIND 
  
6 studies included. 
Higher B/A ratio was associated with abnormal 
ABR in 2 studies, lower IQ at 6 years in one study 
and with Kernicterus in one study 
 
One study found no difference 
 
One study found that binding capacities 
(expressed a B/A molar ratio) were lower in 
babies with kernicterus 
 
Author: 
Malik G 
 
Year: 
1986 
 
Country: 
India 
 
Ref ID: 115 
Study type: 
Case-series 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
Diagnosis: Jaundice 
 
Criteria: Not reported 
 
Exclusion: Respiratory distress, 
Sepsis, 
Hypothermia, 
Hypoglycaemia, 
Postasphysial seizure, 
bleeding diathesis 
 
Setting: Special baby care unit 
 
Sample Size: 53 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Mean GA: 37.9 ± 2.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 2780 ± 620 g 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Mean TsB levels 
227 ± 80 micromol/litre 
 
Mean free bilirubin 
8.7 ± 5.6 nmol/l 
 
Mean Albumin levels 
3.6. ± 0. g/dl 
 
Mean Bilirubin/Albumin ratio 
3.7 
 
Mean Molar B/A ratio 
0.41 
 
correlation between free bilirubin and B-A ratio 
0.74 (P < 0.001) 
 
Author: 
Chan G 
 
Year: 
1980 
 
Country: 
Canada 
 
Ref ID: 116 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
Diagnosis: 
Jaundice 
 
Criteria: 
Jaundice 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Setting: 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
 
Sample Size: 46 (55 samples used) 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Mean TsB levels 
Not reported 
 
Mean free bilirubin 
Not reported 
 
Mean Albumin levels 
Not reported 
 
Mean B/A ratio 
Not reported 
 
 
correlation between free bilirubin and 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
258 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Mean GA: 36 ± 4 weeks 
Mean BW: 2453 ± 813 g 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Bilirubin/Albumin molar ratio 
r = 0.75, P < 0.001 
Author: 
De Carvalho W 
 
Year: 
1992 
 
Country: 
Brazil 
 
Ref ID: 117 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
Diagnosis: Non-haemolytic jaundice 
 
Criteria: 
Mothers who received prenatal care and no previous history 
of lues and with negative serologic test for syphilis, 
Birthweight ≥ 2500 g, 
Negative direct Coombs test, 
Gestational age between 37 and 41 weeks, 
< 7 days old, 
no history of neonatal anoxia and Apgar ≥ 8 at 1 and 5 
minutes, 
normal infants 
no administration of substances competing for albumin 
binding site, 
no phototherapy, exchange transfusion or human albumin 
 
Exclusion: Not reported 
Setting: Neonatal service 
 
Sample Size: Not reported 
Gender M/F: 25/18 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Mean TsB levels 
Not reported 
 
Mean free bilirubin 
11.5 ± 6.0 nmol/litre 
0.0115 ± 0.006 micromol/litre 
 
Mean Albumin levels 
3.33 ± 0.3 g/dl 
 
correlation between free bilirubin and indirect 
bilirubin 
0.69 (P < 0.01) 
Serum albumin levels not taken in 6 
babies 
Author: 
Newman T 
 
Year: 
1991 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
Ref ID: 118 
Study type: 
Retrospective case 
series 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
Diagnosis: 
Jaundice 
 
Criteria: 
Not reported 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Setting: 
Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 149 (9 from Stanford) 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Mean TsB levels 
Not reported 
 
Mean free bilirubin 
Not reported 
 
Mean Albumin levels 
Not reported 
 
Mean B/A ratio 
Not reported 
 
Direct Bilirubin 
Not reported 
 
Direct bilirubin levels were unexplained in 52% of 
cases while 24% were laboratory errors. The 
remainder were as follows; 
Isoimmunisation = 19 (12.7%) 
Sepsis or pneumonia = 5 (3.6%) 
Abnormal direct bilirubin = direct 
bilirubin above 95th percentile in each 
centre (UCSF = ≥ 39micromol/litre, 
Stanford = ≥ 17 micromol/litre) 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
259 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Congestive Heart failure = 5 (3.6%) 
Multiple anomalies = 2 (1.3%) 
Pyloric Stenosis = 2 (1.3%) 
Extreme small for gestational age (possible 
Rubella) = 1(0.7%) 
Hypothyroid = 1(0.7%) 
Choledochal cyst = 1(0.7%) 
Slightly high aminotransferase levels (100 
U/litre) = 3(2.0%) 
Sludge in gallbladder = 1(0.7%) 
Author: 
Newman T 
 
Year: 
1990 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
Ref ID: 119 
Study type: 
Retrospective chart 
review 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
 
Diagnosis: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Criteria: 
Birthweight > 2500 g, 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Low birthweight 
 
Setting: 
Hospital 
 
Sample Size: 447 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 3440 ± 485 g 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Routine hyperbilirubinaemia tests 
Direct Bilirubin 
Blood type, 
Complete blood count, 
Differential cell count, 
Reticulocyte count, 
Platelet count, 
Morph, Urinalysis 
 
Usefulness of tests 
Possible cause of hyperbilirubinaemia identified 
from history, physical exam or routine 
haematocrit done at 4 hours 
145/447 (32.4%) 
 
Other diagnosis related to hyperbilirubinaemia no 
made due to routine hyperbil. investigations 
13/447 (2.9%) 
 
No specific diagnosis related to 
hyperbilirubinaemia: 
214/447 (47.8%) 
 
Diagnoses possibly from routine hyperbil 
investigations not accompanied by other 
diagnoses 
58/447 (12.9%) 
 
Diagnoses possibly from routine hyperbil 
investigations accompanied by other diagnoses 
17/447 (3.8%) 
 
Author: 
Tiker F 
 
Year: 
2006 
 
Country: 
Study type: 
Retrospective chart 
review 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
 
Diagnosis: 
Conjugated Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Criteria: 
Direct bilirubin > 15% of total TsB 
Elevation in biliary enzymes (gamma glutamyl 
transpeptidase (GGT), alkaline pjosphatse (ALP), asparttate 
Mean age at presentation 
240 hours 
 
Mean peak TsB levels 
292 ± 193 micromol/litre 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
260 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments 
Turkey 
 
Ref ID: 121 
transaminase (AST) or alanine transaminase (ALT) 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Setting: 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
 
Sample Size: 42 
Gender M/F: Not reported 
Mean GA: 37 weeks 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Mean peak conjugated bilirubin 
130 ± 130 micromol/litre 
 
Diagnoses in conjugated jaundice 
Culture-proven sepsis: 14/42 (35.7%) 
Perinatal hypoxia-ischemia: 7/42 (16.7%) 
Blood group incompatibility: 5/42 (11.9%) 
Trisomy 21: 3/42 (7.1%) 
TPN-associated cholestasis (3/42 (7.1%) 
Neonatal hepatitis: 2/42 (4.8%) 
Metabolic liver disease: 1/42 (2.4%) 
Biliary atresia: 1/42 (2.4%) 
Portal venous thrombosis: 1/42 (2.4%) Unknown: 
4/42 (9.5%) 
Author: 
Sarlik Y 
 
Year: 
2003 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
Ref ID: 120 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Prolonged Jaundice 
Criteria: Jaundiced at day 14 
Setting: Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
 
Sample Size: 26 
Mean GA: 38 weeks 
Mean BW: 3164 g 
Gender M/F: 15/11 
Ethnicity: Not reported 
Breastfeeding: 96% 
Mean age jaundice recognised: 19 days: 
 
Exclusion: Preterm babies 
Prevalence of prolonged 
jaundice/hyperbilirubinaemia 
31/381 (8.1%) 
 
Median bilirubin levels 
TSB: 246 micromol/litre 
 
Blood group incompatibility: 7/26 (26.9%) 
 
Breast milk jaundice: 14/26 (53.8%) 
 
Possible Biliary Atresia : 1/26 (3.8%) referred to 
pediatric gastroenterology due to direct bilirubin 
 
Inadequate caloric intake: 4/26 (15.4%) 
 
 
Author: Hannam S 
 
Year: 2000 
 
Country: UK 
 
Ref ID: 122 
Study type: 
Case series 
 
Evidence level: 3 
Diagnosis: Prolonged Jaundice 
Criteria: jaundiced at day 14 
Setting: Outpatient 
 
Sample Size: 154 
GA (range): 39(37 – 43) weeks 
BW (range): 3.2 (1.98 – 4.8 kg 
Gender M/F: 96/58 
Ethnicity: 89 (57%) Caucasian, 
36 (23%) Black, 20 (13%) Asian, 9 (6%) Mediterranean 
Breastfeeding: 96% 
Jaundice recognised: Older than 14 days: 
 
Exclusion: Not reported 
Median bilirubin levels 
TSB: 179 micromol/litre 
 
ABO incompatibility: 0/154 (0%) 
 
Incidence of G6PD deficiency: 
3/59 (5.1%) 
 
Infection (UTI): 2/154 (1.3%) 
 
Idiopathic: Not reported 
G6PD testing done where indicated by 
ethnic background of baby 
Clinical Examination by a 
Paediatrician is vital 
Recommended Investigations in 
prolonged jaundice 
 Total & unconugated 
bilirubin 
 PCV & G6PD level (where 
appropriate) 
 Urine microscopy & 
culture 
 Inspection of recent stool 
sample for bile pigmentation 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
261 
Phototherapy 
 
 
 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Author: NICHHD 
 
Year:1985 
 
Country: USA 
 
ID: 129 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers 
table, 
Sealed envelopes 
 
Evidence level: 
1++ 
  
n: 1339 
 
Inclusion: 
BW < 2000gms 
or 
BW between 2000 gms and 
2500 gms and TSB 
> 171 micromol/litre in 96 hours 
or 
BW > 2500 and TSB 
> 222 micromol/litre in 96 hours 
 
Exclusion: 
Rh hemolysis 
TSB > 171 micromol/litre in 
24 hours 
Babies with severe 
conditions/anomalies who care 
would be compromised by 
protocol 
 
Demographics: 
BW less than 2000 gms 
Gender (M/F) :Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean age at entry to study: 
24.2 ± 8.0 hours 
Mean TSB: 
97 ± 33 micromol/litre 
 
BW between 2000 gms and 
2500 gms 
Gender (M/F): 73/66 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study: 
62.6 ± 17.1 hours 
 
Mean TSB: 
212 ± 37 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Usual care 
 
Group 2: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy (Air 
Shields) consisted of 96 hours (with 30 
min breaks every 4 hours for feeding 
etc) 
Daylight fluorescent bulbs 35 – 55cm 
above the baby. 
 
Baby naked and with eye pads (changed 
every 8 hours) 
 
Irradiance measured with a light 
monitoring badge 
 
Babies received 25ml/kg of body weight 
extra fluids 
 
 
 
ET: 
BW less than 2000 g 
Group 1: 22/462 
Group 2: 110/460 
 
BW between 2000 gms 
and 2500 gms 
Group 1: 3/70 
Group 2: 18/71 
 
BW above 2500 gms 
Group 1: 14/140 
Group 2: 23/136 
 
 
: 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
262 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
BW > 2500 
Gender (M/F): 157/119 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study: 
64.8 ± 18.4 hours 
 
Mean TSB: 15.6 ± 2.49 
MG/DL 
 
Author: Martinez J 
 
Year: 1993 
 
Country: USA 
 
ID: 133 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Computer-generated 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
n: 125 
 
Inclusion: 
TSB > 291 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Congenital anomalies 
Neonatal complications 
Birthweight below 10th 
percentile or above 90th 
percentile 
Venous hematocrit > 65% 
Significant bruising 
Large cephalhematoma 
Haemolytic disease 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F):70/55 
Mean GA: 39.2 ± 0.9 weeks 
Mean BW: 3404 ± 361gms 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
 
Mean TSB: 
306 ± 12 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Continue breastfeeding 
 
Group 2: 
Discontinue breastfeeding, substitute 
formula feeds 
 
Group 3: 
Discontinue breastfeeding, substitute 
formula feeds, add Conventional 
phototherapy 
 
Group 4: 
Continue breastfeeding, add 
phototherapy 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy consisted of 
Quartz halide spot unit 
Irradiance = 10microW/cm2 
Light band = 400 – 480 nm 
 
Babies were naked in a bassinet with 
their eyes patched 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at TSB 
< 231 micromol/litre 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/25 
Group 2: 0/26 
Group 3: 0/38 
Group 4: 0/36 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 6/25 
Group 2: 5/26 
Group 3: 1/38 
Group 4: 5/36 
 
TSB levels – change 
Groups 1 + 2 
48 hours: -27 ± 43 micromol/litre 
 
Groups 3 + 4 
48 hours: -72 ± 380 micromol/litre 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
263 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Author: Sisson T 
 
Year: 1971 
 
Country: USA 
 
ID: 130 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Coin toss 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
n: 35 
 
Inclusion: TSB 
> 162 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Sepsis, 
Cephalhaematoma 
Massive ecchymosis 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) :16/19 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 2567 ± 709 gms 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
 
Mean TSB: 193 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
No treatment 
 
Group 2: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy consisted of 
10 (20 watt) fluorescent lamps 
Units were 45 cm above the baby and 
had a Plexiglas shields to block 
ultraviolet radiation. 
Canopies were vented so lamp heat was 
dissipated 
 
Babies removed for no more than 20 
minutes a time for feeding etc 
 
Babies were naked except for eye 
shields and diapers 
 
Light band = 410 – 490 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at TSB 
< 145 micromol/litre 
ET: 
Group 1: 2/14 
Group 2: 3/21 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 9/16 
Group 2: 2/19 
 
 
 
 
TSB levels – change 
Incomplete data 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Incomplete data 
 
Time to max TSB (hours): 
Incomplete data 
 
Author: Meloni T 
 
Year: 1974 
 
Country: Italy 
 
ID: 132 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
n: 24 
 
Inclusion: TSB 
> 188 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Unclear 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
 
Mean TSB: 
209 ± 24 micromol/litre 
Group 1:No treatment 
 
Group 2: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy consisted of 
continuous phototherapy for 96 - 
120 hours 
8 cool white fluorescent tubes which 
deliver (at mattress level) 13.5 ± 3.5 
watts/m2 
 
 
ET: 
Group 1: 6/12 
Group 2: 2/12 
 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 6/12 
Group 2: 2/12 
 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
264 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Author: Ju S 
 
Year: 1991 
 
Country: Taiwan 
 
ID: 134 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
n: 29 
 
Inclusion: TSB between 205 and 
256 micromol/litre 
Full term singletons 
Normal pregnancy 
Normal birth/caesarean 
Birthweight between 10th and 
90th percentile 
Apgar scores ≥ 7 at 1 and 5 
minutes 
 
Exclusion: 
Perinatal complication 
Congenital anomalies 
Possible haemolysis 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 12/14 
Mean GA: 39.0 ± 0.8 weeks 
Mean BW: 3364 ± 334 gms 
Age at entry to study: 
97.2 ± 22.4 hours 
 
Mean TSB: 
221 ± 13 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
No treatment 
 
Group 2: 
Conventional phototherapy 
: 
 
Conventional Phototherapy consisted of 
a portable unit of 4 blue and 4 white 20-
watt fluorescent lamps 
Irradiance at baby skin levels was 5–
6microW/cm2/nm 
Babies moved every 4 hours for feeding 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at TSB 
< 205 micromol/litre 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/13 
Group 2: 0/13 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 4/17 
Group 2: 0/13 
 
 
 
Author: Lewis H 
 
Year: 1982 
 
Country: UK 
 
ID: 131 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers 
table 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
n: 40 
 
Inclusion: 
Birthweight > 2500gms, 
Gestational Age > 37 weeks, 
TSB ≥ 250 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Perinatal asphyxia, 
Apgar score < 5 at 4 minutes, 
Positive DAT test 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 27/13 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 3200 ± 260 gms 
Age at entry to study: 84 hours 
Group 1: 
Conventional Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Conventional Phototherapy - 
Delayed (initiated if TSB rose to 
≥ 320 micromol/litre 
: 
 
Conventional Phototherapy consisted of 
a Vickers 80 white light phototherapy 
unit mounted 50 cm above the baby. 
 
Babies were blindfolded, naked except 
for a napkin while nursing and were 
turned every 3 hours. 
 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/20 
Group 2: 0/20 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 0/20 
Group 2: 3/20 
 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
265 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
Mean TSB: 263 micromol/litre 
Phototherapy discontinued at TSB 
< 250 micromol/litre 
 
Author: Holtrop P 
 
Year: 
1992 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 151 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Computer generated 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
n: 70 
 
Inclusion: 
Birthweight < 2500, 
Birthweight between 10th and 
90th percentile, 
> 24 1 day old, 
no congenital anomalies, 
no Rh incompatibility 
TSB > 85 micromol/litre at BW 
< 1000gms 
TSB > 103 micromol/litre at 
BW 1000 - 1200gms 
TSB > 120 micromol/litre at 
BW 1200 - 1400gms 
TSB > 137 micromol/litre at 
BW 1400 - 1600gms 
TSB > 1071 micromol/litre at 
BW 1600 - 1800gms 
TSB > 12 at BW 1800 - 
2200gms 
TSB 12 - 15 at BW 2200 - 
2500gms 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Double phototherapy (Conventional 
phototherapy 
+ Fiberoptic phototherapy) 
 
 
Single Conventional phototherapy 
consisted of either 
1/ if baby was in an incubator, a 
standard unit (Olympic Bili-lite) with 4 
white and 4 blue fluorescent lamps 35 
cm above the baby. 
Irradiance at skin level was 
9.2microW/cm2/nm 
Light range was 425 – 475 
Or 
2/ if baby was on a radiant warmer, 3 
halogen lights on each side(Air 
Shields7850) with an irradiance of 
7microW/cm2/nm 
 
Double phototherapy consisted of single 
Conventional phototherapy as above 
combined with a ‘Wallaby’ fiberoptic 
blanket measuring 10 X 35 cm. Mean 
irradiance on the blanket’s surface was 
8.2microW/cm2/nm 
 
Babies wore eye patches and wore 
disposable diapers cut to allow 
maximum skin exposure 
Fluids were administered on clinician 
advice  
ET: 
Group 1: 0/37 
Group 2: 0/33 
 
Kernicterus: 
Group 1: 0/37 
Group 2: 0/33 
 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 0/37 
Group 2: 0/33 
 
Rebound jaundice: 
Group 1: 14/37 
Group 2: 12/33 
 
 
 
 
 
Mean duration 
Group 1: Not reported 
Group 2: Not reported 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1:- 45 ± 18 micromol/litre 
Group 2: - 28 ± 20 micromol/litre 
 
 
Author: Nuntnarumit 
P 
 
Year: 2002 
 
Country: Thailand 
 
ID: 136 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
n: 51 
 
Inclusion: 
BW > 2500gms 
GA > 37 weeks 
TSB ≥ 205 micromol/litre at 24–
48 hours 
TSB ≥ 256 micromol/litre at 49–
Group 1: 
Single Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Double Conventional phototherapy 
 
Single Conventional phototherapy 
consisted of 3 daylights and 2 blue 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/27 
Group 2: 0/24 
 
Rebound jaundice: 
Group 1: 1/27 
Group 2: 0/24 
 
Mean duration 
Group 1: 43.7 ± 17.5 hours 
Group 2: 34.9 ± 12.6 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -98 ± 46 micromol/litre 

Neonatal jaundice 
266 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
72 hours 
TSB ≥ 291 micromol/litre at 
≥ 72 hours 
 
Exclusion: 
Babies who had been on 
ventilator support or incubator, 
Babies who had been on 
phototherapy, 
Direct hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : 34/17 
Mean GA: 38.7 ± 1.29 weeks 
Mean BW: 3104 ± 284 
Age at entry to study 
74.6 ± 27.4 
Mean TSB: 
316 ± 47 micromol/litre 
lights 38 cm above the baby. 
 
Double Conventional phototherapy 
consisted of single phototherapy plus an 
additional bank of 8 20watt daylight 
fluorescents lamps 32 cm below the 
baby. 
A ventilated fan was used to prevent 
overheating 
 
Target irradiance was 9–
10microW/cm2/nm 
 
Phototherapy was discontinued when 
TSB < 205 micromol/litre at < 96 hours 
of age or TSB < 256 micromol/litre at 
> 96 hours of age 
 
 
 Group 2: - 156 ± 67 micromol/litre 
 
Stools/day: 
Group 1: 2.8 ± 1.7 
Group 2: 2.2 ± 1.4 
 
Author: 
Boonyarittipong P 
 
Year: 2008 
 
Country: Thailand 
 
ID: 137 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
n: 60 
 
Inclusion: 
Full term (37– 
42 weeks), 
Birthweight > 2500gms, 
Apgar > 6 T 1 and 5 minutes 
TSB between 222 -
340 micromol/litre, 
Nonhemolytic 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Exclusively breastfed, 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 32/28 
Mean GA: 38.6 ± 1.15 weeks 
Mean BW: 3130 ± 311 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
260 ± 30 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Single Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Double Conventional phototherapy 
 
 
Single Conventional phototherapy 
consisted of 4 blue and 2 daylight 
fluorescent lamps at least 30 cm above 
the baby 
Mean irradiance was 
32.7 ± 2.6microW/cm2/nm 
 
Baby wore eye patches and cotton 
diapers 
 
Double Conventional phototherapy 
(Neonatal Jaundice phototherapy 
apparatus/XHZ) was single 
phototherapy and an additional bank of 
4 blue fluorescent lamps 25 cm beneath 
the bassinet. 
A fan was used to prevent overheating 
 
Mean irradiance of overhead unit was 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/30 
Group 2: 0/30 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 0/30 
Group 2: 0/30 
 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -111 ± 39 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -144 ± 36 micromol/litre 
 
Stools/day: 
Group 1: 2.8 ± 1.7 
Group 2: 2.2 ± 1.4 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
267 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
33.7 ± 1.6microW/cm2/nm and not 
reported for the unit underneath the 
baby 
 
 
Phototherapy was discontinued at TSB 
< 222 micromol/litre or phototherapy 
> 48 hours 
 
 
Author: Sarici S 
 
Year: 
2001 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
ID: 139 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Blind allocation 
 
Randomisation: 
Sequential 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 100 
 
Inclusion: 
Birthweight > 2500 gms, 
Nonhemolytic indirect 
hyperbilirubinaemia, Normal 
Reticulocyte count, 
Negative DAT, 
No evidence of blood group 
isoimmunisation 
TSB ≥ 256 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Direct hyperbilirubinaemia, 
Enclosed haemorrhage, 
Infection, congenital 
malformations 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 54/46 
Mean GA: 39.0 ± 0.7 weeks 
Mean BW: 3380 ± 359 gms 
Age at entry to study 
105.4 ± 42.8 hours 
Mean TSB: 
308 ± 47 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy (Ohio 
Medical Products) consisted of a bank 
of 5 daylight fluorescent lamps 30cm 
above the baby 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (Walley II 
Phototherapy System) consisted of a 
single pad (7.6 X 35.5 cm) 
 
Babies in both groups were placed in a 
prone position and all babies wore 
disposable diapers. Babies in the 
phototherapy group wore eye patches 
 
Irradiance and light range were not 
reported 
 
Phototherapy considered to have failure 
if two consecutive measures showed an 
increase in TSB  
ET: 
Group 1: 0/50 
Group 2: 0/50 
: 
Erythema: 
Group 1: 1/50 
Group 2: 1/50 
 
Watery stools: 
Group 1: 3/50 
Group 2: 3/50 
 
Rebound jaundice: 
Group 1: 3/50 
Group 2: 2/50 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 0/50 
Group 2: 4/50 
 
 
Mean duration: 
Group 1: 49.4 ± 14.4 hours 
Group 2: 61.0 ± 13.1 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: 125 ± 39 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 111 ± 42 micromol/litre  
Author: Gale R 
 
Year: 
1990 
 
Country: USA 
 
ID: 140 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
N: 42 
 
Inclusion: 
Full-term (> 37 weeks), 
No haemolytic jaundice 
TSB > 200 micromol/litre but if 
babies had rapidly increasing 
TSB levels they could be 
entered into the study before 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy (Air Shields 
PT 53–3) consisted of a standard 
phototherapy unit (both daylight and 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/22 
Group 2: 0/20 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: Not reported 
Group 2: Not reported 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
268 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
they reached 200 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Evidence of hemolysis 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 39.6 ± 1.6 weeks 
Mean BW: 3197 ± 475 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
186 ± 86 micromol/litre 
blue lamps) positioned above the baby. 
Babies were naked, with eyes covered, 
and were alternate between prone and 
supine position every 6 hours. 
Irradiance at blanket level was 
7.0 ± 0.5microW/cm2/nm. 
 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (Wallaby 
Phototherapy System) consisted of a 
single fiberoptic pad linked to a lightbox 
with 150-watt halogen lamp and a fan 
with 150.ft2/minute air volume. 
Irradiance spectrum was between 425 
and 475 nm. 
Irradiance at blanket level was 
7.0 ± 0.5microW/cm2/nm. 
Babies were placed naked on the 
blanked. While nursing the mother 
could hold the baby wrapped in the 
blanket 
 
In both group babies were kept on 
phototherapy for 48 hours but could be 
withdrawn at any stage.  
Author: 
Dani C 
 
Year: 
2004 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
ID: 153 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Allocation method 
not reported but 
sealed envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 23 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm (GA < 34 weeks), 
No haemolytic jaundice, not on 
respiratory support, 
Clinically stable. 
 
Exclusion: 
Major congenital 
malformations, patent ductus 
arteriosus, intracranial 
haemorrhage, 
Perinatal asphyxia, receiving 
cardiovascular drugs 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 31.0 ± 1.8 weeks 
Mean BW: 1468 ± 400 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy consisted of 
a Photo-Therapie 800 system. Baby was 
naked except for eye patches and in a 
supine position. 
Irradiance and light range not reported 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (BiliBlanket) 
consisted of a mat that covered the baby 
up to the upper abdomen. 
Irradiance and light range not reported 
 
To avoid trans-epidermal water loss the 
babies were placed in incubators with a 
thermo-monitoring system to maintain 
normal body temperature (46.5oC) at a 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/12 
Group 2: 0/11 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 43.0 ± 3.1 hours 
Group 2: 38.7 ± 4.5 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -69 ± 13 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -62 ± 17 micromol/litre  

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
269 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
63.2 ± 15.0 hours 
Mean TSB: 
241 ± 9 micromol/litre 
relative humidity of 60%. 
Author: Al-Alaiyan S 
 
Year: 
1996 
 
Country: 
Saudi Arabia 
 
ID: 135 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Allocation method 
not reported but 
shuffled, sealed 
envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 46 
 
Inclusion: 
GA > 36 weeks, 
Nonhemolytic jaundice 
Age > 1 day, 
Normal hemoglobin, 
No evidence of blood group 
incompatibility, 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 23/23 
Mean GA: 37.9 ± 2.08 weeks 
Mean BW: 2921 ± 696 gms 
Age at entry to study 
37.9 ± 24.1 hours 
Mean TSB: 
185 ± 56 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
Group 3: 
Combined phototherapy and fiberoptic 
phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy (Air Shields 
Fluoro-Lite) consisted of a standard unit 
of blue and white fluorescent bulbs 50 
cm from the baby. 
Mean irradiance was 
11.6 ± 2.2microW/cm2/nm 
Light range = 425 – 475 nm 
Phototherapy was interrupted for 
feeding etc for an average of 115 
minutes per day. 
Babies were naked except for eye 
patches. 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (BiliBlanket) 
consisted of a halogen lamp linked to a 
fiberoptic blanket. 
Mean irradiance was 
22.3 ± 2.2microW/cm2/nm 
Light range = 400 – 500 nm 
Fiberoptic phototherapy was 
continuous. 
 
Combined therapy consisted of both 
conventional and fiberoptic 
phototherapy as above. 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/15 
Group 2: 0/16 
Group 3: 0/15 
 
Rebound jaundice: 
Group 1: 0/15 
Group 2: 0/16 
Group 3: 0/15 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 52.8 ± 24.8 hours 
Group 2: 47.5 ± 24.8 hours 
Group 3: 50.7 ± 24.8 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -14 ± 28 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 19 ± 35 micromol/litre 
Group 3: -23 ± 39 micromol/litre 
: 
 
Author: Pezzati M 
 
Year: 
2000 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Clinician blinded 
 
Randomisation: 
Allocation method 
N: 39 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm babies with 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
> 171 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
 
Conventional Phototherapy (Photo grph 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/19 
Group 2: 0/20 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
270 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
ID: 157 not reported but 
shuffled, sealed 
envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
Malformations, 
Perinatal asphyxia, 
Respiratory distress, renal or 
gastrointestinal abnormalities, 
Patent ductus arteriosus, 
hypotension, 
Hypertension, 
Infection, 
Anaemia, 
polycythemia 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 21/18 
Mean GA: 34.3 weeks 
Mean BW: 2101 g 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
– Therapie 800) consisted of a standard 
unit of blue lamp with two filters 
(infrared and uiltraviolet) 
. 
Babies were naked except for eye 
patches. 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (BiliBlanket) 
 
 
Author: 
Holtrop P 
 
Year: 
1992 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 141 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Computer generated 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 26 
 
Inclusion: 
Birthweight > 2500 gms, 
Age > 1 day, 
No Rh incompatibility, 
Clinical need for phototherapy 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 17/9 
Mean GA: 38.1 ± 2.5 weeks 
Mean BW: 3377 ± 541 gms 
Age at entry to study 
66.3 ± 19.4 hours 
Mean TSB: 
231 ± 24 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy (Olympic 
Bili-lite) consisted of an overhead bank 
of 4 white and 4 blue 35 cm above the 
baby. Babies were naked except for 
diapers and eye patches. Babies were 
removed for feeding. 
Mean irradiance was 
9.2 ± 0.9microW/cm2/nm 
 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (Wallaby 
Phototherapy System) consisted of a 
cummerbund which was wrapped 
around the torso. Babies wore eye 
patches. 
Mean irradiance was 
8.2 ± 1.2microW/cm2/nm 
 
 
Babies were removed form the study if 
the TSB rose by more than 
9 micromol/litre/h 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/14 
Group 2: 0/12 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 1/14 
Group 2: 3/12 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: Not reported 
Group 2: Not reported 
 
: 
 
Author: Pezzati M Methodology: N: 41 Group 1: ET: Mean duration of phototherapy 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
271 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
Year: 
2002 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
ID: 142 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not report but sealed 
envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
 
Inclusion: 
 
Exclusion: 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : Not reported 
Mean GA: 39.6 ± 1.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 3236 ± 425 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
296 ± 32 micromol/litre 
Conventional Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic Phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy ( ‘Photo-
Therapie 800’) consisted of a unit 
incorporating a metal vapour discharge 
blue lamp with 2 filters (an infrared 
filter and a Plexiglas ultraviolet filter). 
A fan was fitted to remove heat 
generated by lamp. 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (BiliBlanket 
PT) consisted of a 140W quartz halogen 
lamp with a built-in dichroic reflector 
with low infrared and ultraviolet 
radiation reflectivity. Light range was 
restricted to 400 – 550 nm. 
 
All babies were naked in a supine 
position at a stabilised room 
temperature. 
Group 1: 0/21 
Group 2: 0/20 
 
 
Group 1: Not reported 
Group 2: Not reported 
 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -55 ± 16 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -51 ± 23 micromol/litre 
Author: 
Romagnoli C 
 
Year: 
2006 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
ID: 152 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
No reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported but 
sealed envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 136 
 
Inclusion: 
TSB> 103 micromol/litre 
GA < 30 weeks 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 72/64 
Mean GA: 27.9 ± 1.4 weeks 
Mean BW: 1019 ± 283 gms 
Age at entry to study 
38.3 ± 7.1 hours 
Mean TSB: 109 
 ± 5 micromol/litre  
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic (Wallaby) phototherapy 
 
Group 3: 
Fiberoptic (BiliBlanket) phototherapy 
 
Group 4: 
Combined conventional and Fiberoptic 
(Wallaby) phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
standard phototherapy composed of 4 
fluorescent lamps and 4 blue lamps 
40cm above the baby. 
Irradiance at skin level was 
22 – 24 microW/cm2/nm. Babies were 
naked except for eye patches and 
disposable diapers. Baby position was 
changed from prone to supine and vice 
versa every 6 hours. 
 
Fiberoptic Wallaby phototherapy 
ET: 
Group 1: 2/33 
Group 2: 2/35 
Group 3: 1/35 
Group 4: 0/33 
 
Erythema: 
Group 1: 10/33 
Group 2: 9/35 
Group 3: 8/35 
Group 4: 12/33 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 2/33 
Group 2: 4/35 
Group 3: 1/35 
Group 4: 0/33 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 90.2 ± 24.3 hours 
Group 2: 92.1 ± 43.3 hours 
Group 3: 94.4 ± 43.3 hours 
Group 4: 75.1 ± 23.6 hours 
 
 
Max TSB:: 
Group 1: 157 ± 43 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 169 ± 56 micromol/litre 
Group 3: 161 ± 44 micromol/litre 
Group 4: 130 ± 22 micromol/litre 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
272 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
consisted of a 10.1 X 15.2 cm pad 
linked to a 150W quartz halogen lamp. 
A light filter is placed between the lamp 
and the fiberoptic bundle to allow only 
400 – 550 nm range through. Irradiance 
at skin level was 8 – 
10 microW/cm2/nm. 
Baby position was changed from prone 
to supine and vice versa every 6 hours. 
 
Fiberoptic BiliBlanket phototherapy 
consisted of an 11 X 13 cm pad linked 
to a 150W tungsten halogen lamp. A 
light filter is placed between the lamp 
and the fiberoptic bundle to allow only 
400 – 550 nm range through. Irradiance 
at skin level was 35microW/cm2/nm. 
Baby position was changed from prone 
to supine and vice versa every 6 hours. 
 
Combined phototherapy consisted of 
conventional phototherapy as above and 
the fiberoptic Wallaby system as above. 
Author: 
Tan K 
 
Year: 
1997 
 
Country: 
Singapore 
 
ID: 138 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Lottery method 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 171 
 
Inclusion: 
Nonhemolytic jaundice, 
TSB > 256 micromol/litre or 
> 222 micromol/litre before 
48 hours, 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 96/75 
Mean GA: 38.5 ± 1.5 weeks 
Mean BW: 3114 ± 415 gms 
Age at entry to study 
96.9 ± 30.9 days 
Mean TSB: 
262 ± 17 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy - Standard 
 
Group 3: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy – Large 
 
Group 4: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy - Double 
 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
seven overhead daylight fluorescent 
lamps arrange din an arc 35cm above 
the baby. The baby was kept unclothed 
except for eye coverings. Irradiance was 
6.73 microW/cm2/nm 
 
The standard fiberoptic (BiliBlanket) 
phototherapy consisted of a pad, 11 X 
20 cm (illuminated part was 11 X 13cm) 
which was used without its sheath and 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/44 
Group 2: 0/42 
Group 3: 0/43 
Group 4: 0/42 
 
Rebound jaundice: 
Group 1: 1/44 
Group 2: 0/42 
Group 3: 0/43 
Group 4: 1/42 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 0/44 
Group 2: 4/42 
Group 3: 3/43 
Group 4: 0/42 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 62.6 ± 24.8 hours 
Group 2: 87.0 ± 39.5 hours 
Group 3: 82.6 ± 38.3 hours 
Group 4: 64.8 ± 35.2 hours 
: 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
273 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
at maximal power. Irradiance was an 
average of 19.01 microW/cm2/nm when 
measured at the centre and at the four 
corners. 
 
The standard fiberoptic phototherapy 
consisted of a pad, 11 X 24 cm 
(illuminated part was 11 X 16cm) which 
was used without its sheath and at 
maximal power. The irradiance was 
calculated to be 23% more than that of 
the standard fiberoptic pad. 
 
The double fiberoptic phototherapy 
consisted of two standard pads one on 
the back and one the front of the baby. 
 
Phototherapy was terminated when TSB 
< 188 micromol/litre on at least two 
occasions 
 
Phototherapy was deemed to have failed 
when TSB values exceeded start level 
on at least two occasions and when 
direct bilirubin was minimal < 0.6 
MG/DL 
Author: Van Kamm A 
 
Year: 
1998 
 
Country: 
Netherlands 
 
ID: 154 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported but 
sealed envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 124 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm babies with birthweight 
< 2000gms, 
Nonhaemolytic jaundice 
 
Exclusion: 
Prior phototherapy, 
Met criteria for exchange 
transfusion 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : 72/52 
Mean GA: 29.7 ± 2.4 weeks 
Mean BW: 1250 ± 353 gms 
Age at entry to study 
26.5 ± 17.5 
Mean TSB: 
94 ± 36 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
4 overhead fluorescent lamps arranged 
in an arc 40 cm above the baby. Baby 
was naked except for eye patches. The 
light range is in the 380 – 480 nm range. 
Irradiance level was 
16 microW/cm2/nm 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (Ohmeda 
BiliBlanket) consisted of a halogen 
lamp illuminating a flat mat using a 
fiberoptic attachment containing 2400 
optic givers woven into the mat. Baby 
was naked. 
The illuminating part of the mat is 11 X 
ET: 
Group 1: 3/68 
Group 2: 4/56 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 27/68 
Group 2: 29/56 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: Not reported 
Group 2: Not reported: 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -2 ± 25 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -2 ± 20 micromol/litre 
 
 
: 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
274 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
13 cm. The light range is in the 400 – 
550 nm range. Irradiance level was 
35 microW/cm2/nm 
 
If TSB levels increased above 
predetermined cut-offs double 
phototherapy was started using 
conventional phototherapy as above. 
Author: 
Dani C 
 
Year: 
2001 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
ID: 155 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported but 
sealed envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 20 
 
Inclusion: 
Aged < 3 days, 
Gestational age between 31 and 
36 weeks, 
Clinically stable, 
No major congenital 
malformations 
 
Exclusion: 
Non-haemolytic jaundice 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 34.4 ± 1.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 2600 ± 382 
Age at entry to study 
49.5 ± 2.9 hours 
Mean TSB: 
227 ± 10 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
a Photo-Therapie 800 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy was an Ohmeda 
BiliBlanket which was wrapped around 
the baby’s torso. 
 
Babies were naked except for eye 
patches and were in a supine position. 
 
Phototherapy was initiated when TSB 
> 220micromol/litre and discontinued 
when TSB < 170 micromol/litre. 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/10 
Group 2: 0/10 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 25.8 ± 3.4 hours 
Group 2: 24.0 ± 2.5 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: Incomplete data 
Group 2: Incomplete data 
 
Author: 
Morris B 
 
Year: 
2008 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 145 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Single-blind – 
outcome assessors 
were unaware of 
allocation 
 
Randomisation: 
Computer-generated 
 
Evidence level: 
1++ 
  
N: 
1974 
 
Inclusion: 
Birthweight between 5001 and 
1000 g 
Between 12 and 36 hurs of age 
 
Exclusion: 
Terminal condition (Ph < 6.8 or 
persistent bradycardia with 
hypoxaemia for > 2 hours), 
Previous phototherapy, 
Major congenital anomaly, 
Hydrops fetalis, 
Severe haemolytic disease, 
Group 1: 
Early Phototherapy – begun when 
Day 1 – 7 TSB > 85 micromol/litre 
Day 8 – 14 TSB > 120 micromol/litre 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy at 
TSB ≥ 137 micromol/litre for BW 501 – 
750 g 
Or 
171 micromol/litre for BW 751 – 
1000 g 
 
TSB was measured daily. 
 
Irradiance was 15 – 40 microW/cm2/nm 
ET: 
Group 1: 2/990 
Group 2: 3/984 
 
Intensive phototherapy: 
Group 1: 3/990 
Group 2: 13/984 
 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 209/990 
Group 2: 201/984 
 
18 – 22 months 
Mortality 
Group 1: 230/946 
Group 2: 218/944 
Max TSB: 
Group 1: 120 ± 31 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 168 ± 36 micromol/litre 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
275 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Congenital nonbacterial 
infection, 
Judgement at parents may be 
able to return for final 
assessment at 18 – 22 months 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : 1013/961 
Mean GA: 26.0 ± 2.0 weeks 
Mean BW: 777 ± 134 g 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported for all 
babies 
and was increased if TSB 
> 222 micromol/litre in BW 501 – 750 g 
or 
TSB > 256 in BW 751 – 1000 g 
 
Exchange transfusion was indicated 
TSB exceeded threshold after 8 hours of 
intensive phototherapy  
RR = 1.05 (95% CI: 0.90, 
1.22) 
 
Neurodevelopmental 
impairment 
Group 1: 235/902 
Group 2: 275/902 
RR = 0.86 (95% CI: 0.74, 
0.99) 
 
 
Author: 
Valdes O 
 
Year: 
1971 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 146 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
75 
 
Inclusion: 
Birthweight < 2500 g 
 
Exclusion: 
Positive Coombs test, 
ABO incompatibility, 
Sepsis 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 1766 g 
Age at entry to study: 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Phenobarbital 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 3: 
Phenobarbital + Phototherapy 
 
Group 4: 
No treatment 
 
 
 
Max TSB: 
Group 1: 96 ± 57 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 58 ± 52 micromol/litre 
Group 3: 63 ± 58 micromol/litre 
Group 4: 140 ± 53 micromol/litre 
 
 
  
 
Author: Costello S 
 
Year: 
1994 
 
Country: 
Australia 
 
ID: 156 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Lottery method 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 44 
 
Inclusion: 
Gestational age between 27 and 
36 weeks 
TSB > 125 micromol/litre) 
(increased with age (hours) and 
birthweight 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Group 1: 
Conventional Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Fiberoptic phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
a standard system of four white and 4 
blue fluorescent lamps 50cm above the 
baby with an intensity of 
8 microW/cm2/nm 
 
Fiberoptic phototherapy (BiliBlanket) 
with a constant setting of 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/24 
Group 2: 0/20 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 3/24 
Group 2: 1/20 
 
 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 44.0 ± 42.8 hours 
Group 2: 42.0 ± 39.1 hours 
 
 
Max TSB: 
Group 1: 210 ± 58 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 198 ± 53 micromol/litre 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
276 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Mean GA: 32.0 ± 0.54 weeks 
Mean BW: 1614 ± 140 gms 
Age at entry to study 
56.6 ± 37.0 hours 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
35microW/cm2/nm. 
 
Baby was nursed in an open cot or 
isolette and turned at regular intervals 
from prone to supine positions. Eyes 
pads were used for babies < 1500gms.  
Author: 
Bertini G 
 
Year: 
2008 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
ID: 159 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported but 
sealed envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 31 
 
Inclusion: 
TSB ≥ 171 micromol/litre, 
Gestational ages < 34 weeks, 
Age < 7days, 
Did not require respiratory 
support, 
Clinically stable 
 
Exclusion: 
Malformations, 
Perinatal asphyxia, 
Patent ductus arteriosus, 
intracranial haemorrhage, 
hypotension, 
Hypertension, 
Infection, 
Anemia (venous Hb< 10g/dl), 
Polycythemia (venous 
Hb> 22 g/dl), 
Infants receiving cardiovascular 
drugs. 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 30.7 ± 2.0 weeks 
Mean BW: 1192 ± 238 gms 
Age at entry to study 
64.4 ± 15.2 hours 
Mean TSB: 
200 ± 16 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
LED Phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy (Photo-
Therapie 800) incorporating a metal 
vapour discharge blue lamp with two 
filters (an infrared cut-off filter and a 
Plexiglas ultraviolet cut-off filter). 20 
cm above the baby. 
 
LED phototherapy (Natus NeoBlue 
system). Light range 450–470nm 
spectrum. Irradiance was at the 
intensive setting at 30–
35 microW/cm2/nm. Unit was placed 
30cm above the baby. 
 
All babies were placed in incubators 
with a thermo-monitoring system to 
maintain a normal body temperature 
(36.5oC) at a relative humidity of 60%. 
Babies received full enteral feeding with 
human milk. 
Babies were naked except for eye 
patches and were in a supine position. 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at 
< 145 micromol/litre 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/14 
Group 2: 0/17 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 38.7 ± 5.0 hours 
Group 2: 34.0 ± 12.0 hours 
 
TSB levels – change 
Group 1: -62 ± 24 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -55 ± 5 micromol/litre 
: 
 
Author: Seidman D 
 
Year: 
2000 
 
Country: 
Israel 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Open label study 
 
Randomisation: 
N: 69 
 
Inclusion: 
Full-term (Gestational age 
> 37 weeks), 
Jaundice according to AAP 
criteria for phototherapy 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
LED phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy (Micro-lites 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/35 
Group 2: 0/34 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 32.0 ± 17.0 hours 
Group 2: 31.0 ± 17.0 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -44 ± 58 micromol/litre 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
277 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
ID: 143 
Computer generated 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
 
Exclusion: 
None reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
251 ± 77 micromol/litre 
PTL 68–1) units equipped with 3 
halogen quartz bulbs. Irradiance was 5–
6 microW/cm2/nm. 
 
LED phototherapy consisted of 6 
focussed arrays each with 100 3-mm 
blue LED’s. Unit was placed 50cm 
above the baby, to achieve an irradiance 
of 5–6microW/cm2/nm. 
 
All babies were placed in a crib and 
were naked except for diapers and eye 
coverings.  
Group 2: -44 ± 46 micromol/litre 
 
 
Author: Seidman D 
 
Year: 
2003 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
ID: 144 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Computer generated 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 114 
 
Inclusion: 
AAP criteria for phototherapy, 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 39.5 ± 1.5 weeks 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study 
53.9 ± 37.8 hours 
Mean TSB: 
251 ± 73 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
LED phototherapy - Blue 
 
Group 3: 
LED Phototherapy - Blue-Green 
 
Conventional phototherapy (Air Shields 
Micro-lites PTL 68–1) units equipped 
with 3 halogen quartz bulbs. Irradiance 
was 5–6 microW/cm2/nm. 
 
Blue LED phototherapy consisted of 6 
focussed arrays each with 100 3-mm 
blue LED’s. Peak wavelength was 
459nm with a half spectral width of 
22nm. Unit was placed 50cm above the 
baby, to achieve an irradiance of 5–
6microW/cm2/nm. 
 
Blue-Green LED phototherapy 
consisted of 6 focussed arrays each with 
100 3-mm blue-green LED’s. Peak 
wavelength was 505nm with a half 
spectral width of 38nm. Unit was placed 
50cm above the baby, to achieve an 
irradiance of 5–6microW/cm2/nm. 
 
 
All babies were placed in open cribs and 
were naked except for diapers and eye 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/57 
Group 2: 0/25 
Group 3: 0/22 
 
Erythema: 
Group 1: 0/57 
Group 2: 0/25 
Group 3: 0/22 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 35.4 ± 20.2 hours 
Group 2: 31.6 ± 19.6 hours 
Group 3: 39.2 ± 25.5 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -44 ± 33 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -39 ± 46 micromol/litre 
Group 3: -41 ± 48 micromol/litre 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
278 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
coverings. 
Author: 
Martins B 
 
Year: 
2007 
 
Country: 
Brazil 
 
ID: 158 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 88 
 
Inclusion: 
Need for phototherapy 
according to birthweight 
 
Exclusion: 
Direct bilirubin 
> 34 micromol/litre 
Haemolytic jaundice, 
Ecchymosis, 
Malformations, 
Congenital infection 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F):58/30 
Mean GA: 33.6 ± 1.9 weeks 
Mean BW: 1998 ± 541 gms 
Age at entry to study 
68.1 ± 25.5 hours 
Mean TSB: 
179 ± 38 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
LED phototherapy 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
a single quartz-halogen lamp, with a 
dichroic reflector, positioned 50cm from 
the baby and illuminating a circle of 
18cm diameter. 
Mean irradiance was 
21 ± 6microW/cm2/nm 
 
LED phototherapy consisted of the 
Super LED system positioned 30cm 
from the patient and illuminating an 
elliptical area of 38cm x 27cm diameter. 
Mean irradiance was 
37 ± 9microW/cm2/nm 
 
Phototherapy discontinued when TSB 
levels decreased 30% from original 
levels 
 
Treatment was considered to have failed 
if TSB continued to rise and reached a 
level 30% below TSB levels required 
for exchange transfusion. 
 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/44 
Group 2: 0/44 
 
Erythema: 
Group 1: 0/44 
Group 2: 0/44 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 0/44 
Group 2: 0/44 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 63.8 ± 37 hours 
Group 2: 36.8 ± 21 hours 
 
TSB levels – change 
24 hours 
Group 1: -22 ± 25 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -50 ± 26 
micromol/litre 
 
Author: Ebbesen F 
 
Year: 
2007 
 
Country: 
Denmark 
 
ID: 160 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not stated but sealed 
envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 141 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm infants (28 – 
36.6 weeks), 
Age > 24 hours, 
No previous phototherapy, 
Non-haemolytic 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 80/61 
Group 1: 
Blue phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Turquoise phototherapy 
 
 
Treatment duration was fixed (24 hours) 
 
Phototherapy consisted of either 8 blue 
fluorescent lamps (20 W, 60 x 3.7cm) 
41 cm above the baby or 8 turquoise 
fluorescent lamps (18 W, 60 x 2.6cm) 
41 cm above the baby. Distance from 
baby was different to ensure irradiance 
was identical in both groups 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/69 
Group 2: 0/72 
 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -78 ± 31 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -92 ± 31 micromol/litre 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
279 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Mean GA: 33.8 ± 2.49 weeks 
Mean BW: 2078 ± 605 gms 
Age at entry to study 
74.0 ± 31.9 hours 
Mean TSB: 
221 ± 60 micromol/litre 
 
 
Phototherapy was continuous with 
breaks for feeding etc 
 
Babies were naked except for eye 
patches and diapers 
Author: Ebbesen F 
 
Year: 
2003 
 
Country: 
Denmark 
 
ID: 161 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 85 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm infants (28 – 
36.8 weeks), 
Age > 24 hours, 
Non-haemolytic 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 49/36 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Blue phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Turquoise phototherapy 
 
Treatment duration was fixed (48 hours) 
 
Phototherapy consisted of either 6 blue 
+ 2 daylight fluorescent lamps 32 cm 
above the baby or 6 turquoise + 
2 daylight fluorescent lamps 32 cm 
above the baby. 
 
Irradiance for turquoise lamps was 
2.72 ± 0.25 mW/cm2 
Irradiance for blue lamps was 
3.52 ± 0.33 mW/cm2 
Irradiance for white lamps was 
0.56 ± 0.07 mW/cm2 
 
 
Phototherapy was continuous with 
breaks for feeding etc 
 
Babies were naked except for eye 
patches and diapers 
 
 
 
: 
 
Author: Ayyash H 
 
Year: 
1987 
 
Country: 
Greece 
 
ID: 162 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Study 1: Full-term 
 
N: 200 
 
Inclusion: 
Idiopathic jaundice 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolytic jaundice 
Group 1: 
Blue Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Green Phototherapy 
 
Phototherapy consisted of 5, either 
green or blue, fluorescent tubes 
mounted on a conventional 
 
 
Study 1 – Full-term 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 49.88 ± 3.02 hours 
Group 2: 42.68 ± 2.74 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -39 ± 2 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -43± 2 micromol/litre 

Neonatal jaundice 
280 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 38.9 ± 0.14 weeks 
Mean BW: 3394 ± 43 gms 
Age at entry to study 
101.8 ± 4.32 hours 
Mean TSB: 
286 ± 60 micromol/litre 
 
 
Study 2: Preterm 
 
N: 62 
 
Inclusion: 
Idiopathic jaundice 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolytic jaundice 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 34.6 ± 0.36 weeks 
Mean BW: 2361 ± 102 gms 
Age at entry to study 
85.6 ± 5.52 hours 
Mean TSB: 
239 ± 16 micromol/litre 
phototherapy unit.  
Study 2 – Preterm 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 53.29 ± 5.9 hours 
Group 2: 53.26 ± 5.52 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -34 ± 6 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -38 ± 8 micromol/litre 
 
Author: Amato M 
 
Year: 
1991 
 
Country: 
Switzerland 
 
ID: 163 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers 
table 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 30 
 
Inclusion: 
Idiopathic hyperbilirubinaemia 
TSB ≥ 250 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Perinatal asphyxia, 
Apgar < 4 at 1 minute and < 6 at 
5 minutes, 
Signs of haemolytic disease, 
secondary hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 13/17 
Group 1: 
Blue Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Green Phototherapy 
 
Phototherapy consisted of either blue or 
green fluorescent tubes 30cm above the 
mattress. The baby was placed naked, 
except for eye patches and gonadal 
protection, on a Plexiglas surface. 
 
Light spectral range of green tubes was 
350–650 nm and 300–600 for the blue 
tubes 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/15 
Group 2: 0/15 
 
Rebound jaundice: 
Group 1: 12/15 
Group 2: 3/15 
 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 34 ± 10 hours 
Group 2: 70 ± 23 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -157 ± 22 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -154 ± 31 micromol/litre 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
281 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Mean GA: 39.0 ± 1.03 weeks 
Mean BW: 3395 ± 547 gms 
Age at entry to study 
70.5 ± 23,1 hours 
Mean TSB: 291± 
35 micromol/litre 
 
Babies were supplemented with 5% 
glucose (15 mg/kg per day) 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at TSB 
< 200 micromol/litre 
 
Rebound jaundice was a rise of 
17 micromol/litre after phototherapy 
discontinuation 
Author: Vecchi C 
 
Year: 
1986 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
ID: 164 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 84 
 
Inclusion: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Blood group incompatibility, 
Haemolytic disease, 
Respiratory distress, 
Sepsis 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 35 weeks 
Mean BW: 1930 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
227 ± 40 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Blue Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Green Phototherapy 
 
Phototherapy units consisted of 8 (blue 
or green) fluorescent tubes positioned 
46 cm above the mattress. 
The total power irradiance reaching the 
baby through two plastic shields was 2.3 
mW/cm2 for green phototherapy and 
3.2 mW/cm2 for blue phototherapy 
 
Phototherapy was continuous except for 
feeding etc 
Babies were placed in an incubator 
 
 
TSB levels – change 
24 hours: 
Group 1: -50 ± 23 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -48 ± 26 micromol/litre 
 
Author: Sisson T 
 
Year: 
1972 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 165 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 72 
 
Inclusion: 
TSB ≥ 150 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Sepsis, 
Respiratory distress, 
Blood group incompatibility, 
Haemolytic disease 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 2097 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 190 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Blue Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Special Blue phototherapy 
 
Group 3: 
White phototherapy 
 
Each phototherapy unit consisted of 10 
fluorescent tubes. 
Irradiance for blue lamps was 0.91 
mW/cm2 
Irradiance for special blue lamps was 
2.9 mW/cm2 
Irradiance for white lamps was 0.32 
mW/cm2 
Incomplete data for all 
outcomes 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 46 ± 15.7 hours 
Group 2: 40 ± 18.3 hours 
Group 3: 75 ± 29.4 hours 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
282 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
Babies wore eye patches 
 
Phototherapy was continuous except for 
breaks for feeding etc 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at a steady 
rate and reached TSB < 
137 micromol/litre 
Author: Shinwell E 
 
Year: 
2002 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
ID: 166 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported but 
sealed, opaque 
envelopes used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 32 
 
Inclusion: 
Full-term, 
Birthweight > 2500gms, 
TSB > 308 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Congenital malformation 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 8/22 
Mean GA: 38 ± 1 weeks 
Mean BW: 3500 ± 478 gms 
Age at entry to study 
104.2 ± 33.7 hours 
Mean TSB: 
320 ± 17 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Supine position 
 
Group 2: 
Changing positions 
 
 
All babies received identical 
phototherapy for periods of 150 minutes 
followed by 30 minute breaks for 
feeding and routine nursing care. 
Babies in changing position group were 
alternated between supine and prone 
 
Phototherapy discontinued after two 
consecutive measurements TSB 
< 239 micromol/litre 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/16 
Group 2: 1/16 
 
 
Rebound jaundice: 
Not reported 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 0/16 
Group 2: 1/16 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 28 ± 9 hours 
Group 2: 40 ± 15 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -114 ± 23 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -108 ± 11 micromol/litre 
 
Author: 
Chen C 
 
Year: 
2002 
 
Country: 
Taiwan 
 
ID: 167 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported but 
sealed envelopes 
used. 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 51 
 
Inclusion: 
TSB > 256 micromol/litre, 
Absence of blood group 
incompatibility, 
Normal G6PD status, 
Haemoglobin > 14g/dl 
 
Exclusion: 
Congenital anomalies, 
Significant bruising, 
Large cephalhematoma 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 19/32 
Mean GA: 38.2 ± 1.14 weeks 
Mean BW:3137 ± 384 gms 
Group 1: 
Supine position 
 
Group 2: 
Changing position 
 
 
Phototherapy initiated at TSB 
≥ 256 micromol/litre and discontinued 
at TSB < 171 micromol/litre 
 
Babies in changing position group were 
alternated between supine and prone 
every 120 minutes 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 53.3 ± 17.9 hours 
Group 2: 52.8 ± 20.2 hours 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -128 ± 54 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -126 ± 45 micromol/litre 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
283 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Age at entry to study 
143.4 ± 48.5 hours 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Author: 
Mohammadzadeh A 
 
Year: 
2004 
 
Country: 
Iran 
 
ID: 168 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 50 
 
Inclusion: 
TSB ≥ 256 micromol/litre (49–
72 hours) 
TSB ≥ 291 micromol/litre 
(> 72 hours) 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolytic disease, 
Congenital anomalies, 
Cephalhaematoma, 
Metabolic disease 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
321 ± 39 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Supine position 
 
Group 2: 
Changing position 
 
All babies received identical 
phototherapy for periods of 150 minutes 
followed by 30 minute breaks for 
feeding and routine nursing care. 
Babies in changing position group were 
alternated between supine and prone 
 
Phototherapy discontinued after two 
consecutive measurements TSB 
< 239 micromol/litre 
 
 
Mean change in TSB: 
Group 1: -68 ± 27 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -62 ± 21 micromol/litre 
 
Author: 
Lau S 
 
Year: 
1984 
 
Country: 
Hong Kong 
 
ID: 172 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
34 
 
Inclusion: 
Full-term, 
Birthweight > 2500gms, 
TSB between 190 – 
205 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Jaundice with known causes 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 39.9 ± 1.5 weeks 
Mean BW: 3229 ± 394 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
198 ± 25 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Continuous Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Intermittent Phototherapy – 4 hours on - 
4 hours off 
 
Group 3: 
Intermittent Phototherapy – 1 hour on - 
3 hours off 
 
Phototherapy was discontinued when 
TSB < 171 micromol/litre 
 Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 89.9 ± 54.2 hours 
Group 2: 86.7 ± 28.9 hours 
Group 3: 100.0 ± 61.0 hours 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
284 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Author: 
Vogl T 
 
Year: 
1978 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 173 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
76 
 
Inclusion: 
Birthweight between 1200 and 
2400gms, 
TSB > 137 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolytic anaemia, 
Positive Coombs tests, 
Respiratory distress syndrome 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : 
Mean GA: 34.7 ± 2.0 weeks 
Mean BW: 1836 ± 299 gms 
Age at entry to study 
56.8 ± 10.8 hours 
Mean TSB: 
150 ± 19 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Continuous Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Intermittent Phototherapy – 15 minutes 
on – 15 minutes off 
 
Group 3: 
Intermittent Phototherapy – 15 minutes 
on – 30 minutes off 
 
Group 4: 
Intermittent Phototherapy – 15 minutes 
on – 60 minutes off 
 
Therapy was discontinued when TSB 
< 137 micromol/litre on two successive 
occasions 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 64 ± 50 hours 
Group 2: 57 ± 45 hours 
Group 3: 79 ± 40 hours 
Group 4: 80 ± 50 hours 
 
Author: 
Fok T 
 
Year: 
1995 
 
Country: 
Hong Kong 
 
ID: 169 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Computer generated 
random numbers 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
203 
 
Inclusion: 
Gestational age > 35 weeks, 
Birthweight > 2300 gms, 
 
Exclusion: 
Other systemic illness, 
Eye infection, 
Haemolysis, 
Treatment with antibiotics, 
History of infection, 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 106/97 
Mean GA: 38.6 ± 2.56 weeks 
Mean BW: 3087 ± 611 gms 
Age at entry to study 
89.5 ± 27.6 hours 
Mean TSB: 
258 ± 27 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Eye patches 
 
Group 2: 
Headbox 
 
Eye patches were obtained 
commercially, were removed during 
feeding and were replaced daily 
 
Headbox consisted of an opaque plastic 
box (20 x 20 x 16cm). Holes were used 
for ventilation. 
Prurient eye discharge 
Group 1: 23/102 
Group 2: 9/101 
 
Features of Conjunctivitis 
Group 1: 13/102 
Group 2: 2/101 
 
 
 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 67.2 ± 33.6 hours 
Group 2: 64.5 ± 26.6 hours 
 
 
HC Professional satisfaction: 
76 (70.4%) of nurse preferred the headbox while 17 (15.7%) 
preferred the eye patches.  
Author: Paludetto R Methodology: N: Group 1:  Mean duration of phototherapy 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
285 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
Year: 
1985 
 
Country: 
Italy 
 
ID: 171 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
38 
 
Inclusion: 
Healthy normal labour and 
delivery, 
Single birth, 
No congenital malformation, 
Apgar > 7 at 5 minutes, 
Birthweight > 2500 gms, 
Full-term, 
Breast –feeding, 
No perinatal complications 
 
Exclusion: 
Babies in Special Care Unit, 
Haemolytic disease, 
Hypocalcaemia, 
Polycythemia 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 24/14 
Mean GA: 39 weeks 
Mean BW: 3395 gms 
Age at entry to study 
66.5 hours 
Mean TSB 232 micromol/litre  
Eye patches 
 
Group 2: 
Screen 
 
 
Screen consisted of an opaque fabric 
suspended from the head end of the 
bassinet with ribbons attached to both 
upper sides of the crib so that the head 
is covered and the fabric falls freely 
upon the shoulders and neck of the 
baby. Two other ribbons tied to the 
lower part of the fabric are attached 
with adhesive tape behind the neck in a 
way that the bay is free to move and the 
fabric does not create any tension in the 
neck. 
Group 1: 23.9 hours 
Group 2: 22.6 hours 
 
Author: 
Wu P 
 
Year: 
1974 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 148 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Randomised cards 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
120 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm babies with birthweight 
between 1250 and 2000 g 
 
Exclusion: 
Gross congenital anomalies, 
Haemolytic anaemias, 
Severe respiratory distress 
syndrome 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 59/61 
Mean GA: 34.0 ± 2.5 weeks 
Mean BW: 1736 ± 199 g 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
No treatment 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy - continuous 
 
Group 3: 
Phototherapy – Intermittent 
 
Babies in phototherapy group received 
5 days of phototherapy while in 
incubators 
 
Phototherapy consisted of 10 20w cool-
white fluorescent lamps suspended 
45cm above the baby. Average 
irradiance during day was 
0.05microW/cm2/nm and at night was 
0.01microW/cm2/nm in the 400 – 500 
nm wave band. 
 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/40 
Group 2: 0/40 
Group 3: 0/40 
 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 2/40 
Group 2: 2/40 
Group 3: 0/40 
Max TSB: 
Group 1: 161 ± 51 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 115 ± 34 micromol/litre 
Group 3: 134 ± 32 micromol/litre 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
286 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
Author: 
Curtis-Cohen M 
 
Year: 
1985 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 149 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
22 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm babies 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolytic disease, 
Direct hyperbilirubinaemia, 
sepsis 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : Not reported 
Mean GA: 27.4 ± 1.4 weeks 
Mean BW: 858 ± 214 g 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Early Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Delayed start of treatment – 
Phototherapy started at TsB 
> 85.5micromol/litre 
 Phototherapy consisted of a broad 
spectrum white light from a tungsten-
halogen lamp in a Model 1400 
phototherapy unit. 
 
Irradiance was maintained at 
12microW/cm2/nm at 450nm 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/11 
Group 2: 0/11 
 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 0/11 
Group 2: 0/11 
 
Max TSB: 
Group 1: 112 ± 27 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 123 ± 20 micromol/litre 
 
Author: 
Leite M 
 
Year: 
2004 
 
Country: 
Brazil 
 
ID: 150 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
81 
 
Inclusion: 
Birthweight < 2000 g 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolysis, 
G6PD deficiency, 
Malformations, 
Intestinal obstructions, 
Cholestasis, congenital 
infections, 
Maternal or neonatal use of 
Phenobarbital, TCB 
> 256.5micromol/litre 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : 37/33 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Early Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy at TsB 
≥ 136.8micromol/litre 
 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at TsB < 
85.5micromol/litre 
 
Phototherapy consisted of fanem Mod 
007 units equipped with 7 Philips 
fluorescent lamps (special blue), 400 – 
540 nm 
 
Average irradiance was 
14.4microW/cm2/nm 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/35 
Group 2: 0/35 
 
Max TSB: 
Group 1: 113 ± 49 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 147 ± 36 micromol/litre 
 
Author: 
Maurer H 
 
Year: 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
N: 
69 
 
Inclusion: 
Group 1: 
Agar – 125mg in first 4ml of formula 
beginning at 18 hours and continued at 
3 hourly intervals for 4 days 
 Max TSB: 
Group 1: 118 ± 40 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 108 ± 36 micromol/litre 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
287 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
1973 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 147 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
Birthweight < 2500 g 
 
Exclusion: 
Positive Coombs test, 
Potential ABO incompatibility, 
sepsis 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : 39/30 
Mean GA: 34.2 ± 3.8 weeks 
Mean BW: 1860 ± 344 g 
Age at entry to study: 
< 24 hours 
 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
 
Group 2: 
Early phototherapy – Intermittent – 
12 hours daily for 4 days 
 
Group 3: 
Early phototherapy – Continuous – 
24 hours daily for 4 days 
 
Group 4: 
No treatment 
 
 
Phototherapy consisted of 8 blue 
fluorescent lamps (200 – 300 foot 
candles) 40 cm above the baby 
Group 3: 60 ± 42 micromol/litre 
Group 4: 147 ± 57 micromol/litre 
 
Author: 
Wananukul S 
 
Year: 
2002 
 
Country: 
Thailand 
 
ID: 188 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Nor reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
40 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm babies requiring 
phototherapy for 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Skin disease, 
Respiratory distress 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : 22/18 
Mean GA: 33.1 ± 2.6 weeks 
Mean BW: 1444 ± 196 g 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: 
171 ± 39 micromol/litre  
Group 1: 
Clear topical ointment 3.0 ml 
(Vaseline:liquid paraffin = 1:1) 
 
Group 2: 
No ointment 
 
All babies were placed in incubators. 
 
Ointment was applied to the whole 
body, measurements taken from upper 
arms, back and legs. 
 
Evaporation rate was measured by a 
method based on the determination of 
the water vapour pressure gradient in 
the air layer closed to the skin surface. 
(Tewameter TM 210) 
 
 
TEWL – at 5 hours 
Group 1: 7.5 ± 1.5 g/m2/h 
Group 2: 8.9 ± 1.6 g/m2/h 
 
Author: 
Eggert P 
 
Year: 
1988 
 
Country: 
Germany 
 
ID: 191 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
N: 
101 
 
Inclusion: 
Uncomplicated 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Age < 40 hours with ABO or Rh 
incompatibility, 
Group 1: 
Conventional Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Conventional Phototherapy + white 
curtains 
 
Group 3: 
Halide Phototherapy 
 
 Mean change in TsB (24 hours) 
Group 1: -56 ± 26 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -80 ± 27 micromol/litre 
Group 3: -55 ± 22 micromol/litre 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
288 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
1- 
  
Babies who received antibiotics 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 62/39 
Median GA: 40 weeks 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: 
243 ± 28 micromol/litre 
All babies were treated in intensive care 
incubators. 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
a Drager 76 unit equipped with 6 blue 
standard fluorescent lights (light range 
410 – 520 nm) 
 
In the second group the four outer walls 
of the incubator were draped in white 
cloth 
 
The halide phototherapy consisted of a 
Drager 8000 halide lamp (light range 
400 – 580 nm) 
 
All phototherapy units were 34cm 
above the mattress. 
 
Babies were naked except for a bikini 
diaper and blindfolds and were their 
position was changed every 4 hours. 
Phototherapy could be interrupted for 
nursing care and feedings. 
 
Babies received oral feedings of either 
mother’s milk or adapted formula and 
dextrose solution.  
Author: 
Djokomuljanto S 
 
Year: 
2006 
 
Country: 
Malaysia 
 
ID: 190 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Investigators blinded 
to allocation 
 
Randomisation: 
Block randomisation 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
100 
 
Inclusion: 
Term babies with uncomplicated 
jaundice requiring phototherapy 
 
Exclusion: 
TsB approaching criteria for 
exchange transfusion 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 56/44 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean age at entry to study: 
105 ± 35 hours 
Mean TSB: 
264 ± 59 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Conventional phototherapy + white 
curtains 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
Phoenix Medical Systems unit of 6 
compact blue fluorescent lamps 45 cm 
above the baby. 
 
Curtains were hung on both sides if the 
phototherapy unit.   
 Mean change in TsB (4 hours) 
Group 1: -4 ± 24 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -28 ± 25 micromol/litre 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
289 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Author: 
Sivanandan S 
 
Year: 
2009 
 
Country: 
India 
 
ID: 192 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported but 
sealed opaque 
envelopes use 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
84 
 
Inclusion: 
Term babies with non-
haemolytic jaundice on a 
postnatal ward of a tertiary level 
neonatal unit 
Age ≥ 24 hours and < 20 days, 
5 minute Apgar > 6, 
TSB < 359 micromol/litre 
 
 
Exclusion: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia requiring 
exchange transfusion, 
Rh haemolysis, 
G6PD deficiency, 
Evidence of haemolysis, 
Positive Coombs’ test, 
Major congenital malformation, 
Culture-positive sepsis, 
Need of intensive care 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 47/35 
Mean GA: 37.5 ± 1.3 weeks 
Mean BW: 2856 ± 345 g 
Mean age at entry to study: 
69 ± 36 hours 
Mean TSB: 
280 ± 39 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Conventional phototherapy + white 
curtains 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
Phoenix Medical Systems unit of 4 blue 
and 2 white compact fluorescent lamps 
45 cm above the baby. 
 
Light range was425 – 475 nm 
 
White plastic sheets could be attached to 
the sides of the unit 
 
Treatment failure was defined as TSB 
> 342 micromol/litre 
 
Phototherapy was discontinued if 
If started after 72 hours of age after two 
consecutive TSB < 256 micromol/litre 
If started before 72 hours of age after 
two consecutive were less than age-
specific threshold for phototherapy 
 
TSB was measured for rebound after 
8 hours 
Phototherapy failure 
Group 1: 52 
Group 2: 4/42 
 
 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/10 
Group 2: 0/10 
 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 0/10 
Group 2: 0/10 
 
Mean change in TsB (24 hours) 
Group 1: -34 ± 63 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -39 ± 56 micromol/litre 
 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: 24.9 ± 15.4 hours 
Group 2: 23.3 ± 12.9 hours 
 
Author: 
Grunhagen D 
 
Year: 
2002 
 
Country: 
Netherlands 
 
ID: 187 
Methodology: 
Case series 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
 
N: 
18 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm with non-haemolytic 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): / 
Mean GA: 30.6 ± 1.6 weeks 
All babies received phototherapy which 
consisted of a single quartz spotlight 
(Bililight Ohmeda) 55 cm above the 
baby. The irradiance was 
12.5 microwatt/cm² per nm. Light range 
was 420 – 480 nm. 
 
TEWL was measured with a Tewameter 
TM210 (YSI Inc) and measurements 
taken on chest or back of the baby. 
 
TEWL was measured when 
hyperbilirubinaemia was diagnosed and 
60 minutes after initiation of 
 Mean change in TEWL 
2.9 ± 3.9 g/m2/h 
 
TEWL retuned to pre-phototherapy levels within 1 hour of 
discontinuation of phototherapy 

Neonatal jaundice 
290 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Mean BW: 1412 ± 256 g 
Mean age at entry to study: 
120 ± 72 hours 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
phototherapy. 
 
Author: 
Wananukul S 
 
Year: 
2001 
 
Country: 
Thailand 
 
ID: 185 
Methodology: 
Comparative study 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
2- 
 
N: 
80 (40 with hyperbilirubinaemia 
who received phototherapy and 
40 healthy controls) 
 
Inclusion: 
Term babies 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 44/36 
Mean GA: 39.0 ± 1.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 3166 ± 435 g 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Babies with hyperbilirubinaemia 
received conventional phototherapy in 
open cribs. Phototherapy consisted of 6 
white and 2 blue fluorescent bulbs in a 
plexiglass-bottomed box 30cm above 
the baby. Irradiance was 
10 microwatt/cm² per nm. 
 
TEWL was measured with a Tewameter 
TM 2/0 (Courage & Khazama) and 
measurements were taken at chest, 
interscapular and buttocks of the baby. 
Measurements were taken before 
phototherapy and repeated at 30 minutes 
and 6 hours during phototherapy.  
ET: 
Group 1: 
Group 2: 
 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 
Group 2: 
 
Mean change in TEWL 
PT: 1.2 ± 3.9 g/m2/h 
Control: 0.2 ± 0.9 g/m2/h 
 
TEWL retuned to pre-phototherapy levels within 1 hour of 
discontinuation of phototherapy 
Author: 
Maayan-Metzeger A 
 
Year: 
2001 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
ID: 186 
Methodology: 
Case series 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
  
N: 
31 
 
Inclusion: 
Preterm with 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Respiratory distress, 
Sepsis, 
Need for ventilatory support 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 15/16 
Mean GA: 31.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 1447 g 
Mean age at entry to study: 
106 hours 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
All babies were nursed naked, except 
for eye pads, in incubators and received 
phototherapy.. 
 
Conventional phototherapy consisted of 
(Air Shields Micro-Lite) Light range 
was 400 – 500 nm. 
 
TEWL was measured usinga combined 
Tewameter and corneometer (Courage 
and Khazka) 
 
TEWL was measure in seven body 
areas; forehead, upper back, cubital 
fossa, palms, abdomen, soles, and 
inguinal region. 
 
Measurement were taken before start of 
phototherapy and repeated during 
phototherapy (at least 4 and up to 
24 hours) 
 Mean change in TEWL 
PT: 4.3 ± 4.7 g/m2/h 
 
Author: 
Rosenfeld W 
 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
N: 
74 
 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Patent Ductus Arteriosus 
Group 1: 23/38 
Group 2: 11/36 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
291 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Year: 
1986 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 184 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Randomisation chart 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
Inclusion: 
Preterm babies with gestational 
age between 26 and 32 weeks 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F):Not reported 
Mean GA: 29.4 weeks 
Mean BW: 2034 g 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: micromol/litre 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy with Chest shields 
 
All babies were receiving early 
phototherapy to prevent 
hyperbilirubinaemia and were nursed 
under radiant warmers, receive 
mechanical ventilation for respiratory 
distress syndrome. 
 
Standard phototherapy units (Air 
Shields) were used Mean light intensity 
was 4.77 microwatt/cm² per nm 
 
Chest shields were folded (doubled) 
piece of aluminium foil covered in a 
gauze pad and taped over the left chest.  
 
Late mortality 
Group 1: 4/38 
Group 2: 10/36 
 
 
Author: 
Tatli M 
 
Year: 
2008 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
ID: 178 
Methodology: 
Comparative study 
with healthy controls 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
2- 
  
N: 
47 (14 were healthy controls) 
 
Inclusion: 
Term babies with non-
haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F):29/18 
Mean GA: 39.3 ± 0.9 weeks 
Mean BW: 3021 ± 450 g 
Mean age at entry to study: 
113 ± 46 hours 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Phototherapy consisted of standard unit 
of 4 blue and 2 white fluorescent tubes 
(Air Shields) with a light range of 480 – 
520 nm and an irradiance of 
12 microwatt/cm² per nm. Phototherapy 
lasted 72 hours, babies whose TsB 
declined to normal levels before 
72 hours were excluded. 
 
 
 
 
Mean change in Lymphocyte-DNA damage 
PT: 29.1 ± 1.9 
Control: 2.7 ± 2.9 
 
Author: 
Berg P 
 
Year: 
1997 
 
Country: 
Sweden 
 
ID: 180 
Methodology: 
Retrospective 
matched case–control 
study 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
N: 
150 
 
Inclusion: 
30 cases of childhood cancer 
before 20 years of age and 120 
controls 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Demographics: 
 
 
PT 
Cases: 0/30 
Controls: 11/120 
No increased risk of developing childhood malignant melanoma 
in skin of babies who received phototherapy  

Neonatal jaundice 
292 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
2- 
  
Gender (M/F):Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Author: 
Matichard E 
 
Year: 
2006 
 
Country: 
France 
 
ID: 182 
Methodology: 
Case control study 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
2- 
  
N: 
58 
 
Inclusion: 
Primary school children (age 8 – 
9) 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) 30/28 
Mean GA: N/A 
Mean BW: NA 
Mean age at entry to study: N/A 
Mean TSB: N/A 
Collected information included, 
Phototype (Fitzpatrick’s classification), 
Behaviour in the sun, 
Sun protection policy, 
History of phototherapy for neonatal 
jaundice 
 
A melanocytic nevus count was 
conducted by a dermatologistpy 
 
The size of nevi was recorded < 2mm, 
2–5mm, > 5mm 
 
Received 
phototherapy = 18 
 
Controls = 40 
Mean melanocytic coun (nevus ≥ 2mm): 
Phototherapy 3.5 ± 3.05 
Controls:1.45 ± 1.99 
Author: 
Turan O 
 
Year: 
2004 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
ID: 183 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
98 
 
Inclusion: 
Term and preterm babies 
receiving phototherapy for 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Congenital malformations, 
Sepsis, babies receiving positive 
inotropic drugs 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F):Not reported 
Mean GA: 36.7 ± 3.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 2880 ± 803 g 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
 
 
 No significant correlation found between heart rate, systolic 
blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure and mean blood 
pressure and serum nitric oxide and vascular endothelial growth 
factor. 
  
Author: 
Speck W 
 
Year: 
1979 
Methodology: 
Review 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
Review of in vivo studies of 
effects of phototherapy on cell 
DNA 
 
 
  

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
293 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 177 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
Author: 
Weissman A 
 
Year: 
2009 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
ID: 189 
Methodology: 
Before–after study 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
  
N: 
30 
 
Inclusion: 
Jaundice 
GA = 37 – 42 weeks 
Apgar (1 min) > 7 
Apgar (5 min) > 8 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolysis, 
G6PD, 
Fever, 
Maternal use of narcotic 
analgesic drugs during labour, 
Ruptured membranes > 18ours 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F)16/14 
Mean GA: 39.1 ± 1.5 weeks 
Mean BW: 3116 ± 392 g 
Mean age at entry to study: 
53 ± 31 hours 
Mean TSB:  
238 ± 43 micromol/litre 
Phototherapy consisted of 
an overhead LED unit (neoBLUE) 
Irradiance was 34 microwatt/cm² per 
nm. 
 
 
 Heart Rate variability – SD1 
Before: 12 ± 8 ms 
After : 8 ± 4ms 
P < 0.02 
 
Heart Rate variability – SD2 
Before: 33 ± 16 ms 
After : 22 ± 10 ms 
P < 0.01 
 
Heart Rate variability – SDDN 
Before: 30 ± 14 ms 
After : 18 ± 7 ms 
P < 0.01 
 
Heart Rate variability – RMSSD 
Before: 18 ± 12 ms 
After : 11 ± 6 ms 
P < 0.02 
 
 
 
Author: 
Mahe E 
 
Year: 
2009 
 
Country: 
France 
 
ID: 181 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
828 
 
Inclusion: 
Primary school children (age 8 – 
9) 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) 415/413 
Mean GA: N/A 
Collected information included, 
Phototype (Fitzpatrick’s classification), 
Behaviour in the sun, 
Sun protection policy, 
History of phototherapy for neonatal 
jaundice 
 
A melanocytic nevus count was 
conducted by trained nurses who was 
blind to whether the child had received 
phototherapy 
 
The size of exposed body parts (arm and 
Received 
phototherapy = 180 
 
Controls = 648 
There was no difference in nevus counts as a function of 
exposure to neonatal phototherapy. 
 
Mean melanocytic count: 
Phototherapy 16.8 ± 9.8 
Controls:16.7 ± 10.5 

Neonatal jaundice 
294 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Mean BW: NA 
Mean age at entry to study: N/A 
Mean TSB: N/A 
back)was record < 2mm, 2–5mm, 
> 5mm 
 
Author: 
Ayclcek A 
 
Year: 
2008 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
ID: 179 
Methodology: 
Case control study 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
2- 
  
N: 
65 
 
Inclusion: 
Indirect hyperbilirubinaemia 
TSB > 222 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Severe congenital malformation, 
Preterm birth or postmaturity, 
Maternal diabetes, 
Birth asphyxia, 
Sepsis, 
Haemolysis due to ABO/Rh 
incompatibility, 
Phototherapy before blood was 
collected, 
Bilirubin rising by more than 
85 micromol./litre day in first 
24 hour, 
Tsb > 410 micromol/litre 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) 35/28 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Mean age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: Intensive phototherapy 
 
Group 2: Conventional phototherapy 
 
Group 3: No phototherapy 
 
Phototherapy consisted of six white 
fluorescent tubes 40cm above the baby. 
12–16 microwatt/cm² per nm. 
 
 
Intensive phototehrpay consisted of 12 
white fluorescent tubes 20cm above and 
below the baby. 
30–34 microwatt/cm² per nm. 
 
DNA damage was measured in blood 
samples taken after phototherapy. The 
images of 100 randomly selected nuclei 
(50 from each of two replicate slides) 
were analysed visually. 
 
 Mean duration of phototherapy: 
Group 1: 54 ± 6 hours 
Group 2: 61 ± 10 hours 
Group 3: N/A 
 
 
DNA damage (arbitrary units): 
Group 1: 32 ± 9 
Group 2: 28 ± 9 
Group 3: 21 ± 10 
P < 0.001 
 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
295 
Is it beneficial to give additional fluids (cup feeds, fluids) during treatment with phototherapy? 
 
 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Author: 
Tontisirin K 
 
Year: 
1989 
 
Country: 
Thailand 
 
ID: 176 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
25 
 
Inclusion: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia TSB 
≥ 256.5 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 3185 ± 288 gms 
Age at entry to study: 
95 ± 17.7 hours 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Formula feed – Enfamil (Energy = 20 
kcal/oz, contains 1.5 g/dl protein, 3.7 g/dl 
fat, 7 g/dl carbohydrate, mineral 0.34 g/dl, 
water 87.4 g/dl) 
 
Group 2: 
Lactose-free Formula  feed – Enfamil 
ProSobee(Energy = 20 kcal/oz, contains 
2 g/dl protein, 3.6 g/dl fat, 6.6 g/dl 
carbohydrate, mineral 0.3 g/dl, water 
87.4 g/dl) 
 
Babies were fed ad libitum with formula 
(3 ounces) 8 times/day. 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TsB: 
Group 1: -97 ± 41 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -92 ± 46 micromol/litre 
 
Weight gain/loss: 
Group 1: 33 ± 65 gms 
Group 2: -7 ± 55 gms 
 
 
Author: 
Mehta S 
 
Year: 
2005 
 
Country: 
India 
 
ID: 174 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Stratified block 
randomisation (based 
on TsB levels) using 
sealed opaque 
envelopes 
 
Evidence level: 
1++ 
  
N: 
74 
 
Inclusion: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
TsB > 308 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
TsB > 427 micromol/litre, 
Kernicterus, 
Evidence of hemolysis, 
Signs of dehydration, 
Major congenital 
malformations, 
Babies on IV fluids 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 52/22 
Mean GA: 37.6 ± 0.9 weeks 
Mean BW: 2936 ± 473 gms 
Age at entry to study 
130 ± 31 hours 
Mean TSB: 
350 ± 31micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy + Usual feeds 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Usual Feeds + Extra fluids 
 
Extra fluids consisted of IV fluid 
supplementation with N/5 saline in 5% 
dextrose for a period of 8 hours before 
phototherapy. After babies were offered 
30mL/kg/day of extra oral feeds 
(expressed breast milk or formula) until 
phototherapy discontinued 
 
Phototherapy was discontinued when two 
TsB values obtain 12 hours apart were 
< 256 micromol/litre 
 
Exchange transfusion was done if at 
4 hours into the study TsB increased by 
> 34 micromol/litre or if at 8 hours TsB 
remained > 342 micromol/litre 
Exchange Transfusions 
Group 1: 20/37 
Group 2: 6/37 
 
 
Mean decrease in TsB (24 hours): 
Group 1: -69 ± 28 micromol/litre 
n = 17 
Group 2: -95 ± 22 micromol/litre 
n = 31 
 
Mean duration of treatment: 
Group 1: 73 ± 31 hours 
Group 2: 52 ± 18 hours 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
296 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Author: 
Boo N 
 
Year: 
2002 
 
Country: 
Malaysia 
 
ID: 175 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Stratified 
randomisation (type 
of feed, hydration 
status, and TsB 
levels) using sealed 
envelopes 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
54 
 
Inclusion: 
TsB > 300 micromol/litre 
with conjugated bilirubin 
<15% of TsB 
 
Exclusion: 
Sick babies, 
Major congenital 
malformations, 
Conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia, 
prolonged jaundice 
 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 28/26 
Mean GA: 39.4 ± 0.9 weeks 
Mean BW: 3075 ± 429 gms 
Age at entry to study: 
139 ± 47 hours 
Mean TSB: 
377 ± 66 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy + Enteral feeds alone 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + 50 % Enteral feeds + 50 % 
Intravenous feeds 
 
All babies received a daily maintenance 
fluid level of 90 mL/kg on day 2, 1290 
mL/kg on day 3 and 150 mL/kg from day 
4 onwards. 
They were also given an additional 10% of 
their respective total daily fluid 
requirement to compensate for the fluid 
loss. 
 
Enteral feeds group 
Formula-fed babies were given 8 divided 
feeds at 3 hour intervals. Breastfed babies 
were breastfed on demand. In addition 
they were given half of the calculated 
volume of formula feeds given to the 
formula-fed babies. 
 
Enteral + Intravenous group 
Formula-fed babies were given half of 
their 24hour fluid requirement at eight 
divided feeds at 3hour intervals. The 
remaining half of their daily fluid 
requirement was given as continuous 
intravenous1/5 normal saline and 5% 
dextrose infusion via a peripheral vein 
over 24 hours. Breastfed babies were 
breastfed on demand. Half of their daily 
fluid requirement was given as continuous 
intravenous1/5 normal saline and 5% 
dextrose infusion via a peripheral vein 
over 24 hours. 
Exchange Transfusions 
Group 1: 5/27 
Group 2: 8/27 
 
Mortality 
Group 1: 0/27 
Group 2: 0/27 
 
 
Mean decrease in TsB (4 hours): 
Group 1: -37 ± 44 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -43 ± 37 micromol/litre 
 
 
Author: Martinez J 
 
Year: 1993 
 
Country: Argentina 
 
ID: 133 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Computer-generated 
 
Evidence level: 
N: 125 
 
Inclusion: 
TSB > 291micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Congenital anomalies 
Neonatal complications 
Birthweight below 10th 
Group 1: 
Continue breastfeeding 
 
Group 2: 
Discontinue breastfeeding, substitute 
formula feeds 
 
Group 3: 
Discontinue breastfeeding, substitute 
formula feeds, add Conventional 
ET: 
Group 1: 0/25 
Group 2: 0/26 
Group 3: 0/38 
Group 4: 0/36 
 
Treatment failure: 
Group 1: 6/25 
Group 2: 5/26 
Group 3: 1/38 
Mean decrease in TsB (48 hours): 
Group 3: -77 ± 41 micromol/litre 
Group 4: -65 ± 34 micromol/litre 
 
Only data from groups 3 
and 4 used 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
297 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
1+ 
  
percentile or above 90th 
percentile 
Venous hematocrit > 65% 
Significant bruising 
Large cephalhematoma 
Haemolytic disease 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F):70/55 
Mean GA: 39.2 ± 0.9 weeks 
Mean BW: 3404 ± 361gms 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
 
Mean TSB: 306 ± 12  
micromol/litre 
phototherapy 
 
Group 4: 
Continue breastfeeding, add Conventional 
Phototherapy 
 
Conventional Phototherapy consisted of 
Quartz halide spot unit 
Irradiance = 10 microwatt/cm² 
Light band = 400 – 480 nm 
 
Babies were naked with eyes patched in a 
bassinet 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at TSB 
< 231 micromol/litre 
Group 4: 5/36 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
298 
 
 
 
How to monitor a baby with jaundice? 
 
When to discharge a baby treated for hyperbilirubinaemia? What follow-up is required? 
 
 
 
 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments Bibliographic details 
Author: 
Kaplan M 
 
Year: 
2005 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
ID: 126 
Study Type: 
Clinical study 
 
Evidence Level: 
3 
 
Diagnosis 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Criteria: 
Need for phototherapy:  according to 
AAP 1997 
 
Setting 
Medical Center 
 
Demographics: 
Sample size: 226 
Gender (M/F): 134/92 
Mean GA: 
39 ± 2 weeks 
Mean BW: 
3204 ± 445 g 
 
Phototherapy criteria 
< 24 hours 170 micromol/litre 
24–38 hours 205 micromol/litre 
48–72 hours 256 micromol/litre 
> 72 hours 291–308 micromol/litre 
 
Babies with risk factors at 17 – 
34 micromol/litre below these levels 
 
For readmitted babies 
TsB ≥ 308 – 342 micromol/litre 
 
Bilirubin routinely measured every 12 hours 
(checked more if clinical need) 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at 
205 micromol/litre or if TsB did not reach 205 
once TsB stabilised  and became lower than 
75th centile on the hour specific nomogram 
 
 
Rebound Jaundice criteria 
TsB measured between 2 and 36 hours after 
discontinuation of phototherapy 
If TsB was ≥ 120% of post-phototherapy or 
≥ 239 micromol/litre were followed at 12–
24 hour intervals 
 
Phototherapy was r-continued at clinician 
discretion but usually not below 
256 micromol/litre  
Primary phototherapy 
Mean TsB at onset: 
251 ± 53 micromol/litre 
 
Age at onset 
53 ± 29 hours 
 
Mean duration 
43 ± 23 hours 
 
Mean TsB at discontinuation 
182 ± 20 micromol/litre 
 
Rebound Jaundice 
30/196 (15.3%) 
 
Phototherapy after readmission 
Mean TsB at onset: 
318 ± 22 micromol/litre 
 
Age at onset 
122 ± 38  hours 
 
Mean duration 
30 ± 9 hours 
 
Mean TsB at discontinuation 
182 ± 18 micromol/litre 
 
Rebound Jaundice 
0/30 (0.0%) 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
299 
Bibliographic details Study type & 
Evidence level 
Patient characteristics Results Reviewers Comments Bibliographic details 
 
Author: 
Barak M 
 
Year: 
2009 
 
Country: 
Israel 
 
ID: 125 
Study Type: 
RCT 
 
Evidence Level: 
1++ 
 
Diagnosis 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Criteria: 
GA > 36 weeks 
BW > 2500 g 
 
Setting 
Medical Center 
 
Randomisation method: 
Computer-generated block 
randomisation. 
Sequence was concealed until 
allocation was completed 
 
Blinding: 
Parents 
 
Demographics: 
Sample size: 52 
Gender (M/F): 27/25 
Mean GA: 
38.7 ± 1.6 weeks 
Mean BW: 
3302 ± 453 g 
Mean TsB: 
252 ± 36 micromol/litre 
Once TsB reached criteria for phototherapy 
(AAP 2004)19 the baby was given phototherapy 
to two group for when phototherapy should be 
discontinued 
 
Group 1 
TsB ≥ 17 micromol/litre below threshold 
Group 2 
TsB  ≥ 51 micromol/litre below threshold 
Duration of phototherapy: 
Group 1: 22 ± 13 hours 
Group 2: 27 ± 12 hours 
 
Rebound level – 10 hours: 
Group 1: 1.8 ± 25.6 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 4.8 ± 22.2 micromol/litre 
 
Rebound level – 28 hours: 
Group 1: 19.1 ± 29.1 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 11.6 ± 36.4 micromol/litre 
 
Number requiring PT 
Group 1: 5/25 (20.0%) 
Group 2: 5/27 (18.5%) 
 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
300 
 
Exchange transfusion 
 
 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Author: 
Tan K 
 
Year: 
1975 
 
Country: 
Singapore 
 
ID: 197 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
52 
 
Inclusion: 
Non-hemolytic jaundice 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 28/24 
Mean GA: 
37.0 ± 2.78 weeks 
Mean BW: 2501 ± 576 gms 
Age at entry to study 
84 ± 12 hours 
Mean TSB: 
297 ± 25 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Double Volume Exchange transfusion 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy 
 
Both treatments initiated at 
256.micromol/litre in preterm babies and 
at 308 micromol/litre in term babies 
 
Exchange transfusion was performed in 
the morning using the umbilical vein. 
Acid Citrate Dextrose blood (warmed to 
37oC) less than 5 days old was used. 
Volume was 170ml/kg body weight 
Daily TSB values from capillary blood 
were determined until stabilisation at a 
safe level or an obviously decreasing trend 
were observed. 
 
Phototherapy consisted of seven 
fluorescent lamps 
Light spectral range = 400 – 500 nm 
Energy output range = 250 –
330 microwatt/cm² 
Phototherapy discontinued at TSB 
< 188 micromol/litre 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 0/26 
Group 2: 0/26 
 
 
Treatment failure (repeated 
treatment) 
Group 1: 8/26 
Group 2: 0/26 
 
TSB < 188 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 3/26 
Group 2: 25/26 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB (24 hours): 
Group 1: -26 ± 24 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -77 ± 17 micromol/litre 
 
 
Author: 
Amato M 
 
Year: 
1988 
 
Country: 
Switzerland 
 
ID: 196 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers 
table 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
20 
 
Inclusion: 
ABO incompatibility, 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Perinatal asphyxia, 
Congenital anomalies, 
Documented congenital 
infection, 
Suspected or proven bacterial 
infection, 
Group 1: 
Double Volume Exchange Transfusion 
 
Group 2: 
Single Volume Exchange Transfusion 
 
Blood preparation 
A unit of packed red cells was used. 
Mean blood volume of each unit was 
280 ± 40 ml (2/3 red cell volume and 1/3 
plasma volume) 
Mean sodium was 
168 ± 43 micromol/litre 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 0/10 
Group 2: 0/10 
 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -73 ± 33 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -69 ± 20 micromol/litre 
 
Duration of phototherapy (hours): 
Group 1: 38.1 ± 16.4 hours 
Group 2: 45.4 ± 17.7 hours 
 
Rebound level: 
Group 1: 74 ± 41 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 65 ± 17 micromol/litre 
 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
301 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Respiratory distress, 
Secondary 
hyperbilirubinaemia (due to 
medications, polycythemia, 
skin hematomas or 
cephalhematoma) 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 15/5 
Mean GA: 39.5 ± 1.0 weeks 
Mean BW: 3305 ± 392 gms 
Age at entry to study 
17.9 ± 6.13 hours 
Mean TSB: 
207 ± 45 micromol/litre 
Mean potassium 6.8 ± 1.4 micromol/litre 
No immunoglobulin or clotting factors 
were present. 
Hemoglobin and hematocrit values were 
equally distributed between the two 
samples. 
Exchange transfusion was performed 
through the umbilical vein in 1 hour using 
a disposable exchange transfusion set in 
10 ml portions. 
No additional calcium or human albumin 
given 
 
All babies received double phototherapy 
after exchange transfusion. 
 
Phototherapy consisted of a double blue 
light united (2 x 30 microwatt/cm²) 
mounted 30 cm above and under the 
mattress. Babies were nursed with 
10%(120ml/kg) glucose 
 
Phototherapy discontinued at TSB 
< 205 micromol/litre on two successive 
occasions. 
 
Rebound jaundice was defined as a rise of 
17 micromol/litre or more after treatment 
was discontinued. 
 
 
Author: 
Chan G 
 
Year: 
1976 
 
Country: 
Canada 
 
ID: 198 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
42 
 
Inclusion: 
Need for exchange 
transfusion 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 25/17 
Mean GA: 36.0 ± 0.7 weeks 
Mean BW: 2455 ± 153 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
Group 1: 
Double Volume Exchange Transfusion 
 
Group 2: 
Double Volume Exchange Transfusion + 
Albumin priming 
 
Double Volume Exchange Transfusion 
consisted of Acid Citrate Dextrose blood 
less than 48 hours old 
 
Albumin priming consisted 1 gm/kg of 
salt-poor human albumin given 
intravenously 1 hour prior to the exchange 
transfusion 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 0/27 
Group 2: 0/15 
 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -193 ± 56 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -168 ± 63 micromol/litre 
 
Rebound level: 
Group 1: 74 ± 32 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 92 ± 56 micromol/litre 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
302 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
263 ± 82 micromol/litre 
Author: 
Grajwer L 
 
Year: 
1976 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 199 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
43 
 
Inclusion: 
Need for exchange 
transfusion 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
> 2500 g 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 39.1 ± 1.8 weeks 
Mean BW:3234 ± 494 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
328 ± 25 micromol/litre 
 
< 2500 g 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 32.6 ± 3.2 weeks 
Mean BW:1670 ± 434 gms 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: 
304 ± 48 micromol/litre 
> 2500gms 
Group 1: 
Double Volume Exchange Transfusion of 
whole blood less than 5 days old 
 
Group 2: 
Frozen erythrocytes diluted in plasma 
 
< 2500gms 
Group 1: 
Exchange transfusion of whole blood less 
than 5 days old 
 
Group 2: 
Frozen erythrocytes diluted in plasma 
 
 
Exchange transfusion criteria were 
1/ Cord blood bilirubin > 85.5  
micromol/litre and rapidly increasing by 
more than 8.5 micromol/litre an hour) 
2/ Increase of TSB > 17.1 micromol/litre 
per hour during first 24 hours if cord 
blood bilirubin is unknown 
3/ Two repeated values of 
342 micromol/litre indirect bilirubin for 
babies > 2500 gms or 273.6 micromol/litre 
in babies < 2500gms 
4/ In sick preterm babies with asphyxia or 
acidosis or receiving ventilatory assistance 
ET was performed at two repeated values 
of 356.5 micromol/litre 
 
Exchange transfusion was repeated after 
two repeated values of 342 micromol/litre 
indirect bilirubin for babies > 2500gms 
and 273.6 micromol/litre for babies 
< 2500gms 
> 2500gms 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 0/5 
Group 2: 1/8 
 
< 2500gms 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 1/14 
Group 2: 3/16 
 
 
> 2500gms 
Repeat ET: 
Group 1: 1/5 
Group 2: 1/8 
 
< 2500gms 
Repeat ET: 
Group 1: 4/14 
Group 2: 7/16 
 
 
 
> 2500gms 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -144 ± 17 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -149 ± 22 micromol/litre 
 
< 2500gms 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -156 ± 51 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -177 ± 24 micromol/litre 
 
 
Sample was divided into 
2 groups < 2500gms and 
> 2500gms before 
randomisation 
Author: 
Locham K 
 
Year: 
2002 
 
Country: 
India 
Methodology: 
CCT 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
N: 
30 
 
Inclusion: 
Jaundice requiring exchange 
transfusion 
 
Exclusion: 
Group 1: 
Double Volume Exchange Transfusion 
 
Group 2: 
Double Volume Exchange Transfusion + 
Supplementary calcium 
 
 
 No jaundice related outcomes Noted increased 
instances of bradycardia 
and fluctuations in heart 
rate after calcium 
injections. One baby 
had cardiac arrest. 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
303 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
 
ID: 201 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study 
Hrs: Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Author: 
Ahmed S 
 
Year: 
2005 
 
Country: 
India 
 
ID: 202 
Methodology: 
Case series 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
3 
  
N: 
198 
 
Inclusion: 
Need for exchange 
transfusion 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 65/3 
Mean GA: 34.5 weeks 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Peripheral exchange transfusion 
 
Brachial or radial artery was cannulated 
with a 24G cannula under all aseptic 
conditions. A good peripheral or 
antecubital vein on the other side was 
cannulated with a 22G or a 24G angiocath. 
Citrate phosphate dextrose fresh blood 
was used for the procedure & and 
phototherapy was used pre & post 
exchange. 
Two operators carried out the procedure 
using aliquots of 5–10 ml on withdrawal; 
and infusion. Three way stop-cocks were 
used on either side and arterial catheter 
flushed with 0.5ml of heparin solution 
(5units/ml) after every 50ml. 
Procedure was performed under radiant 
warmer with monitoring of heart rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature and 
oxygen saturation. 
 
Reported decreased 
chances of sepsis, 
complete exchange and 
more safety in peripheral 
exchange transfusion/ 
It is also cost-effective as 
only two angiocaths, two 
stop-cocks and two 10ml 
syringes are needed 
compared to a complete 
exchange set used in 
umbilical route. 
: 
 
 
Author: 
NICHHD 
 
Year: 
1985 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 129 
Methodology: 
Randomised 
controlled trial 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
1++ 
N: 190 
 
Inclusion: 
Received an exchange 
transfusion 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 
Not reported 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
 
 
 
 
Adverse effects: 
:Transient bradycardia: 8 
(4.2%) - 6 with calcium 
 
Transient cyanosis:  3 
(1.6%) 
 
Transient vasospasm: 2 
(1.0%) 
 
Vasospasm with 
thrombosis: 2 (1.0%) 
 
Apnea and/or bradycardia 
requiring treatment: 7 
(3.7%) 
 
Mean decrease in TSB after ET: 
139 ± 30 micromol/litre 
 
This report includes data 
from exchanges 
transfusions carried out 
during a RCT of 
phototherpay.  

Neonatal jaundice 
304 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Mortality: 
One baby died with 
6 hours of ET 
Three died with 24 hours 
of ET 
Author: 
Mollison P 
 
Year: 
1952 
 
Country: 
UK 
 
ID: 194 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers, 
Sealed envelopes 
used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
137 
 
Inclusion: 
Haemolytic disease of the 
newborn, 
Term babies 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Exchange transfusion 
 
Group 2: 
Simple transfusion 
 
All exchange transfusion were carried out 
with 9 hours of birth, using a concentrated 
suspension of Rh-negative red cells 
(60ml/lb) 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 8/62 
Group 2: 21/57 
 
 
Deaths due to kernicterus 
Group 1: 6/62 
Group 2: 18/57 
 
Kernicterus 
Group 1: 12/62 
Group 2: 22/57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data from one centre 
‘N’ used 
Author: 
Armitage P 
 
Year: 
1953 
 
Country: 
UK 
 
ID: 195 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers, 
Sealed envelopes 
used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secondary publication 
of 194 
Author: 
Patra K 
 
Year: 
2004 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 203 
Methodology: 
Retrospective chart 
review 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
N: 
55 
 
Inclusion: 
Babies who had an exchange 
transfusion, 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Poplycythemia, 
 Adverse Effects/ET 
Mortality: 1/66 
Hypotension: 5/66 
Seizures: 1/66 
Platelets 
< 50 000 microlitre/litre : 
29/66 
Calcium < 8mg/dl: 19/66 
Catheter malfunction: 6/66 
Hypoglycemia: 2/66 
 
 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
305 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Evidence level: 
3 
  
anaemia 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 30/25 
Mean GA: 35 ± 4 weeks 
Mean BW:2388 ± 973 g 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: 
307.8 ± 136.8 micromol/litr
e 
 
Respiratory distress: 2/66 
Bradycardia: 1/66 
Hypokalemia: 1/66 
Acute renal failure: 1/66 
Omphalitis: 1/66 
Author: 
Wishingrad L 
 
Year: 
1965 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 193 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Stratified 
randomisation 
And sealed envelopes 
used 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
100 
 
Inclusion: 
Indirect serum Bilirubin 
> 307.8 micromol/litre 
No anomalies, 
Less than 7 days old 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Unclear 
Mean GA: 
Not reported 
Mean BW: 
Not reported 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: 
Not reported 
 
Group 1: 
Double volume exchange transfusion 
 
Group 2: 
No treatment 
 
The double volume exchange transfusion 
(based on an estimated blood volume of 
75ml/kg) was carried out with type 
specific blood, less than 72 hours old, and 
warmed to room temperature. The 
umbilical vein was cannulated with a 
plastic catheter and plastic disposable 
equipment used. 10ml aliquots were used. 
Small amounts (0.5ml) of 10% calcium 
gluconate were given after each 100ml of 
donor blood with continuous auscultation 
of the heart. All babies in exchange 
transfusion group received penicillin and 
streptomycin. 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 3/50 
Group 2: 3/50 
 
Abnormal neurological 
examination (1 – 2 years) 
Group 1: 7/50 
Group 2: 6/50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author: 
Jackson J 
 
Year: 
1997 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 204 
Methodology: 
Retrospective chart 
review 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
None 
 
Evidence level: 
N: 
106 
 
Inclusion: 
Babies who had an exchange 
transfusion 
 
Exclusion: 
None 
 
Demographics: 
Group 1: 
Exchange transfusion 
 
Mortality:due to ET 
2/106 (1.9 %) 
 
Permament serious 
sequelae due to ET 
4/106 (3.8%) 
 
Serious prolonged 
sequelae due to ET 
5/106 (4.7%) 
 
 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
306 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
3 
  
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 36.6 ± 3.6 weeks 
Mean BW: 2846 ± 806 g 
Age at entry to study 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Serious transient sequelae 
due to ET 
18/106 (17.0%) 
 
Asymptomatic treated 
complications 
27/106 (25.5%) 
 
Asymptomatic laboratory 
complications 
11/106 (10.4%) 
 
 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
307 
 
What are the other ways of treating hyperbilirubinaemia? Are they effective? 
 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Author: 
Pascale J 
 
Year: 
1976 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 217 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numerical 
selection 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
24 
 
Inclusion: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 12/12 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study: 
71.3 ± 24.1 hours 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Low-irradiance Phototherapy + Riboflavin 
 
Group 3: 
Phototherapy + Riboflavin 
 
 
Riboflavin was given for 6 hours prior to 
phototherapy and was discontinued after 
24 hours of phototherapy. Riboflavin 
consisted of sodium phosphate 1.5mg/kg 
every 12 hours 
 
Phototherapy irradiance was 8 – 
10 microwatt/cm² 
Low irradiance was Phototherapy 
irradiance was 6 – 7 microwatt/cm² 
 
 
 
: 
 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB (24 hours): 
Group 1: -53 ± 13.5 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -52 ± 10.2 micromol/litre 
Group 3: -89 ± 18.8 micromol/litre 
 
 
Author: 
Pataki L 
 
Year: 
1985 
 
Country: 
Hungary 
 
ID: 218 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
28 
 
Inclusion: 
ABO – Incompatible 
jaundice 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 3338 ± 425 g 
Age at entry to study: 
50.2 ± 27.2 hours 
Mean TSB: 
358 ± 71micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Riboflavin 
 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) was diluted by a 
three-fold volume of physiological saline 
and a single intravenous dose of 10mg/kg 
was given slowly.  
 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB (3 hours) 
Group 1: 32 ± 55 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -87 ± 40 micromol/litre 
 
Subjects were 
awaiting exchange 
transfusion 
Author: 
Yurdakok M 
 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
N: 
124 
 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -55 ± 67.2 micromol/litre 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
308 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Year: 
1988 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
ID: 219 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
Inclusion: 
Indirect hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Exclusion: 
Those who received 
exchange transfusions 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 3230 ± 502 g 
Age at entry to study: 
61.9 ± 11.0 hours 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Riboflavin 
 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) was given as a 
single oral dose of 3mg/kg within 30 
minutes of start of phototherapy. 
 
 Group 2: -85 ± 42.1 micromol/litre 
 
 
Mean duration of treatment: 
Group 1: 45.7 ± 27.5 hours 
Group 2: 55.0 ± 31.1 hours 
Author: 
Ashkan M 
 
Year: 
2007 
 
Country: 
Iran 
 
ID: 212 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Computerised using 
sealed opaque 
envelopes 
 
Evidence level: 
1++ 
  
N: 
90 
 
Inclusion: 
Term babies, 
Birthweight between 2500 
and 3500 g, 
TsB between 292 and 
425 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Congenital anomaly, 
Haemolytic disease, 
Infection, 
Dehydration, 
G6PD deficiency, 
Conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 47/43 
Mean GA: 38.8 ± 1.6 weeks 
Mean BW: 2542 ± 547 g 
Age at entry to study: 
125 ± 45.6 hours 
Mean TSB: 
301 ± 23.4 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Low-dose clofibrate 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Moderate-dose clofibrate 
 
Clofibrate was administered in a single 
dose (either low-dose = 25 mg/kg body 
weight or moderate dose = 50 mg/kg body 
weight) orally in a mixture of corn oil 30 
minutes before breastfeeding. 
No side-effects were noted 
 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB (24 hours) : 
Group 1: -104 ± 14 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -186 ± 13 micromol/litre 
Group 3: -186 ± 16 micromol/litre 
 
 
Mean duration of treatment: 
Group 1: 25.3 ± 4.4 hours 
Group 2: 14.2 ± 1.2 hours 
Group 3: 14.7 ± 1.5 hours 
Clofibrate groups 
were combined 
Author: 
Mohammadzadeh A 
 
Year: 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
N: 
60 
 
Inclusion: 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
No adverse effects noted 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -210 ± 44 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -184 ± 37 micromol/litre 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
309 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
2005 
 
Country: 
Iran 
 
ID: 213 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers 
table 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
Term, breastfed babies, 
TsB between 291 and 
512micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Congenital anomaly, 
Haemolytic disease, 
Dehydration, 
G6PD deficiency, 
Conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F):34/26 
Mean GA: 38.7 ± 0.9 weeks 
Mean BW: 3259 ± 481 g 
Age at entry to study: 
216 ± 94.8 hours 
Mean TSB: 
395 ± 58 micromol/litre 
Phototherapy + Clofibrate 
 
Clofibrate was administered in a single 
oral dose (100 mg/kg) 
 
  
 
Mean duration of treatment: 
Group 1: 54 ± 18.8 hours 
Group 2: 30 ± 12.9 hours 
Author: 
Zahedpasha Y 
 
Year: 
2007 
 
Country: 
Iran 
 
ID: 215 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
No reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
60 
 
Inclusion: 
Gestational age between 38 
and 41 weeks, 
TsB between 256 and 
427micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolytic disease, Rh or 
ABO incompatibility, 
G6PD deficiency, 
dehydration, 
Infection, 
Conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia, 
History of Phenobarbital 
intake by mother or infant 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 28/32 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study: 
144 ± 71 hours 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy + Placebo 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Clofibrate 
 
Subject in the clofibrate group received a 
single oral dose of clofibrate (100 mg/kg 
body weight) while the control group 
received distilled water in the same 
amount and colour.  
No adverse effects were 
noted 
 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -108 ± 24 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -148 ± 20 micromol/litre 
 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
310 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Mean TSB: 
305 ± 36micromol/litre 
Author: 
Zahedpasha Y 
 
Year: 
2008 
 
Country: 
Iran 
 
ID: 216 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
40 
 
Inclusion: 
G6PD deficiency, 
Gestation age between 38 and 
41 weeks, 
Birthweight > 2500 g 
TsB between 256 and 
342 micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Haemolytic disease, 
conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia, 
dehydration, infection, 
history of Phenobarbital 
intake by mother or infant 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 3257 ± 479 g 
Age at entry to study: 
123 ± 55 hours 
Mean TSB: 
307 ± 33micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Clofibrate 
 
Subject in the clofibrate group received a 
single oral dose of clofibrate (100 mg/kg 
body weight) 
No adverse effects were 
noted 
 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -104 ± 29 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -142 ± 26 micromol/litre 
 
Author: 
Eghbalian F 
 
Year: 
2007 
 
Country: 
Iran 
 
ID: 214 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers 
table 
 
Evidence level: 
1+ 
  
N: 
60 
 
Inclusion: 
Term, breastfed babies, 
Birthweight > 2500 g, 
TsB between 256 and 
427micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Congenital anomalies, 
Haemolytic disease, 
Sepsis, 
Dehydration, 
Exchange transfusion 
 
Demographics: 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Clofibrate 
 
Subject in the clofibrate group received a 
single dose of clofibrate (100 mg/kg body 
weight) 
No adverse effects were 
noted 
 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -137 ± 45 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -171 ± 30 micromol/litre 
 
 
Mean duration of treatment: 
Group 1: 68.8 ± 21.6 hours 
Group 2: 53.6 ± 15 hours 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
311 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
 
Author: 
Miqdad A 
 
Year: 
2004 
 
Country: 
Saudi Arabia 
 
ID: 206 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
112 
 
Inclusion: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia due to 
ABO incompatibility 
 
Exclusion: 
Low birthweight, 
Rh haemolytic disease,, 
Perinatal asphyxia, severe 
congenital malformations 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 70/42 
Mean GA: 38 weeks 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study: 
Not reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + IVIG 500 mg/kg body 
weight over 4 hours 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 4/56 
Group 2: 16/56 
 
 
 
 
Mean duration of treatment: 
Group 1: 106 ± 29 hours 
Group 2: 92 ± 29 hours 
 
Author: 
Voto L 
 
Year: 
1997 
 
Country: 
Argentina 
 
ID: 205 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
40 
 
Inclusion: 
Rh positive blood type and 
Positive Coombs’ test 
 
Exclusion: 
Rh positive blood and 
negative Coombs’ test, 
Histroy of prenatal therapy 
(Imaternal IVIG/IUT) 
ABO incompatibility, 
Other causes of haemolyisis 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 37.2 ± 2.7 
Mean BW: 2834 ± 569 g 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy +  IVIG  800 mg/kg body 
weight per day for 3 days 
Exchange transfusion: 
Group 1: 8/19 
Group 2: 12/18 
 
No adverse effects were 
noted 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Author: 
Rubo J 
 
Year: 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
N: 
32 
 
Inclusion: 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Exchange transfusion: 
Group 1: 11/16 
Group 2: 2/16 
 
Max TsB: 
Group 1: 240 ± 78 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 254 ± 86 micromol/litre: 
Prevention study 
 
One baby in each 
group excluded for 

Neonatal jaundice 
312 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
1992 
 
Country: 
Germany 
 
ID: 207 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
Babies with Rh antigens born 
to mothers lacking Rh 
antigens, 
Positive Coombs’ test 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Phototherapy +  IVIG  500 mg/kg body 
weight over 2 hours 
No adverse effects were 
noted 
 
 
 
 
 
protocol violations 
Author: 
Dagoglu T 
 
Year: 
1995 
 
Country: 
Turkey 
 
ID: 208 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
None 
 
Randomisation: 
Random numbers 
table with sealed 
envelopes 
 
Evidence level: 
1++ 
  
N: 
41 
 
Inclusion: 
Babies with Rh antigens born 
to mothers lacking Rh 
antigens, 
Positive Coombs’ test 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 25/16 
Mean GA: 36.1 ± 2.0 weeks 
Mean BW: 2776 ± 419 g 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: Not reported 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + IVIG 500 mg/kg body 
weight as soon as possible after birth 
Exchange transfusion: 
Group 1: 15/19 
Group 2: 4/22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max TSB: 
Group 1: 224 ± 99 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 198 ± 106 micromol/litre 
 
 
 
 
Author: 
Nasseri F 
 
Year: 
2006 
 
Country: 
Iran 
 
ID: 209 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
34 
 
Inclusion: 
Gestation age > 37 weeks, 
Positive Coombs’ test, 
Significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia rising at 
8.5micromol/litre per hour, 
TsB below exchange 
transfusion levels, 
 
Exclusion: 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + IVIG 
 
IVIG (500 mg/kg body weight) was given 
with 2–4 hours of admission for 3 
consecutive doses each 12 hours 
Exchange transfusion: 
Group 1: 11/17 
Group 2: 3/17 
 
No adverse effects were 
noted 
 
 
 
 
Mean duration of treatment: 
Group 1: 154 ± 48 hours 
Group 2: 119 ± 23 hours 
 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
313 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Risk factors for 
hyperbilirubinaemia, i.e. 
sepsis, G6PD deficiency 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 14/20 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: 2683 ± 292 g 
Age at entry to study: 
20.2 ± 9.5 hours 
Mean TSB: 
254 ± 57micromol/litre 
Author: 
Farhat A 
 
Year: 
2006 
 
Country: 
Iran 
 
ID: 225 
Methodology: 
RCT 
 
Blinding: 
Double-blind 
 
Randomisation: 
Not reported 
 
Evidence level: 
1- 
  
N: 
104 
 
Inclusion: 
TsB between 308 and 
496micromol/litre 
 
Exclusion: 
Birthweight < 2500 g, 
Renal failure, 
Systemic infections, 
Already taken Shirkhest 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: Not reported 
Mean BW: Not reported 
Age at entry to study: Not 
reported 
Mean TSB: 
401 ± 53 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy + Placebo 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Shirkhest 
 
Shirkhest (6 g) was diluted in 8mL of 
distilled water while the control group 
were given a starch solution (0.1%, 8mL) 
coloured with 1 drop of caramel solution 
to appear identical to Shirkhest solution. 
 
Phototherapy was discontinued at 
256micromol/litre 
No adverse effects were 
noted 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TsB: 
Group 1: -164 
Group 2: -154 
 
 
Author: 
Nicolopoulos D 
 
Year: 
1978 
 
Country: 
Greece 
 
ID: 220 
Methodology: 
CCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Alternation 
 
Evidence level: 
2- 
  
N: 
40 
 
Inclusion: 
Jaundice 
 
Exclusion: 
Babies of diabetic mothers, 
Rh incompatibility, 
Perinatal asphyxia, 
Large cephalhaematoma 
 
Demographics: 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Cholestyramine 
 
Babies received 1.5 g/kg per day of 
cholestyramine powder mixed in milk 
 
No Phenobarbital, other medications, or 
parenteral fluids were administered. 
No adverse effects were 
noted 
 
 
 
 
Mean duration of treatment: 
Term babies 
Group 1: 84.4 ± 12 hours 
Group 2: 41.8 ± 5.5 hours 
 
Preterm babies 
Group 1: 73.3 ± 9 hours 
Group 2: 47.0 ± 6 hours 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
314 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Term babies 
Gender (M/F): 6/14 
Mean GA: 39.1 ± 0.3 weeks 
Mean BW: 3286 ± 39 g 
Age at entry to study: 
90 ± 1.5 hours 
Mean TSB: 
298 ± 5 micromol/litre 
 
Preterm babies 
Gender (M/F): 9/11 
Mean GA: 33.4 ± 0.3 weeks 
Mean BW: 2077 ± 88 g 
Age at entry to study: 
76 ± 2.9 hours 
Mean 
TSB:198 ± 5micromol/litre 
Author: 
Tan K 
 
Year: 
1984 
 
Country: 
Singapore 
 
ID: 221 
Methodology: 
CCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
Alternation 
 
Evidence level: 
2- 
  
N: 
84 
 
Inclusion: 
Term babies with non-
haemolytic 
hyperbilirubinaemia (TsB 
≥ 256.5micromol/litre) 
Normal G6PD status, 
No isoimmunisation, 
no cephalhaematoma 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): Not reported 
Mean GA: 38.9 ± 0.2 weeks 
Mean BW: 3154 ± 139 g 
Age at entry to study: 
84 ± 2.9 hours 
Mean TSB: 
298 ± 5micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Cholestyramine 
 
Babies received 1.5 g/kg per day of 
cholestyramine powder mixed in milk 
 
 
 
 
 
Mean decrease in TSB: 
Group 1: -168 ± 24 micromol/litre 
Group 2: -150 ± 20 micromol/litre 
 
 
Author: Martin J 
 
Methodology: 
CCT 
N: 100 
 
Group 1: 
Usual nursery care 
ET: 
Group 1: 3/35 
Mean duration of phototherapy 
Group 1: NA 
No significant 
differences 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
315 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Year: 1974 
 
 
Country: New 
Zealand 
 
ID: 224 
 
 
Blinding: Not 
reported 
 
Randomisation: 
‘allocated in rotation’ 
 
Evidence level:2- 
 
Inclusion: physiological 
jaundice 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F) : 49/51 
Mean GA: 34.8 ± 2.7 weeks 
Mean BW: 2155 ± 632 gms 
Age at entry to study 
48.1 ± 14.7 hours 
Mean TSB: 
174 ± 40 micromol/litre 
 
Group 2: 
Usual nursery care + Conventional 
phototherapy 
 
Group 3: 
Usual nursery care + phototherapy + 
phenobarbitone (for babies with 
birthweight ≥ 3kg, 8mg x 3 per day, 
For babies with birthweight < 3kg, 
2mg/kg x 3 per day) 
 
 
Conventional Phototherapy consisted of a 
single bank of eight 30 watt fluorescent 
tubes behind a Perspex screen  50cm 
above the baby in a bassinet 
Light intensity = 2500 lux 
Light band = 441 nm 
Baby naked and with eyes covered 
No deliberate attempt to sequentially 
rotate the baby 
Group 2: 0/34 
Group 3: 1/31 
 
Mortality: 
Group 1: 2/35 
Group 2: 0/34 
Group 3: 1/31 
 
Group 2: 67 ± 33 hours 
Group 3: 72 ± 31 hours 
 
Mean rise to max TSB: 
Group 1: 80.4 ± 49.6 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 22.2 ± 29.1 micromol/litre 
Group 3: 18.8 ± 29.1 micromol/litre 
 
Time to max TSB (hours): 
Group 1: 51 ± 23 hours 
Group 2: 14 ± 19 hours 
Group 3: 13 ± 18 hours 
 
between groups 
 
No reason given 
for mortality 
Author: 
Odell G 
 
Year: 
1983 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 222 
Methodology: 
CCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
Randomisation: 
By patient number 
 
Evidence level: 
2- 
  
N: 
52 
 
Inclusion: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
requiring phototherapy 
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 31/21 
GA: Not reported 
BW:2767 ± 69 g 
Mean age at entry to study: 
80.6 ± 28.7 hours 
Mean TSB: 
234 ± 46.8 micromol/litre 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Agar 250mg orally every 
8 hours during phototherapy 
 
Phototherapy initiated at 
239.4 micromol/litre for term babies and 
171 micromol/litre for preterm babies 
 
Phototherapy discontinued 
188.1 micromol/litre for term babies and 
171 micromol/litre for preterm babies 
 
 
Mean duration of Phototherapy 
Group 1: 48.1 ± 23.0 hours 
Group 2: 37.6 ± 18.0 hours 
15 babies excluded 
retrospectively 
Author: 
Ebbesen F 
 
Year: 
1977 
 
Methodology: 
CCT 
 
Blinding: 
Not reported 
 
N: 
49 
 
Inclusion: 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
requiring phototherapy 
Group 1: 
Phototherapy 
 
Group 2: 
Phototherapy + Agar 250mg orally at 
feedings every three hours 
 
 
Mean decrease in TsB 
Group 1: 87 ± 39 micromol/litre 
Group 2: 85 ± 40 micromol/litre 
 
Mean duration of Phototherapy 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
316 
Bibliographic 
Information 
Study Type & 
Evidence Level 
Number of 
Patients/Characteristics 
Intervention & Comparison Dichotomous outcomes 
(E:C) 
Continuous Outcomes 
(Mean:SD: N) 
Comments 
Country: 
Denmark 
 
ID: 223 
Randomisation: 
By patient number 
 
Evidence level: 
2- 
  
 
Exclusion: 
Not reported 
 
Demographics: 
Gender (M/F): 26/23 
GA: 36.8 ± 2.5 weeks 
BW:2729 ± 538 g 
Mean age at entry to study: 
87  ± 26 hours 
Mean TSB: 
274 ± 51 micromol/litre 
 
Phototherapy initiated at 
274 micromol/litre 
 
Phototherapy discontinued when TsB fell 
continuously for 24 hours 
Group 1: 60 ± 30 hours 
Group 2: 61 ± 28 hours 

Appendix H: Evidence tables 
317 
 
What information and support should be given to parents/carers of babies with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
 
 
Author: 
Salem-Schatz S 
 
Year: 
2004 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 228 
Study Type: 
Focus group study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
Four focus groups 
1 for physicians (n = 9) 
1 for nurses (n = 9) 
2 for parents/carers (n = 14) 
 
Aim: 
To identify barriers to timely follow-
up of hyperbilirubinaemia in 1st 
7 days 
 
Focus had between 7 and 9 
participants and lasted for between 
90 and 120 minutes 
 
Content was the importance of 1st 
week newborn follow-up and key 
questions relating to physican and 
parent/carer experiences 
Barriers  - communication 
Conflicting advice from HCP’s on 
readiness for discharge - MD 
Communication gaps between handover 
from hospital to community - MD, RN 
Key information missing MD, RN 
 
 
 
 
Barriers – systems and process 
Delays in outpatient bilirubin testing and 
reporting - MD, RN 
Barrier to home visits – MD, RN, P 
Barriers to office visits in week 1 – MD, 
RN, P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers – systems and process 
Shorter hospital stays leave less time for 
parent education –RN 
Clinicians may be reluctant to educate 
about hyperbilirubinaemia prenatally – 
MD, RN 
Poor understanding by clinicians of risks of 
near-terms – MD 
Lack of clinician awareness of the 
recommendations of early follow-up visits 
– MD 
HCP recommendations forgotten once 
parent is home – P 
Solutions - communication 
Improve communication between HCP - MD 
Notify community HCP  by email when baby 
born – MD, RN 
Provide easy-access (on-line or form parent) 
for community HCP for lab results – MD, RN 
Give parents/carers ‘early warning signs’ to 
report – MD, P 
 Continued contact from birth hospital to 
parent/carer – P 
 
Solutions – systems and process 
Home visit by a physician – P 
Encourage home visits, RN, P 
Choose paediatrician before discharge/book 
appointment before discharge – MD 
Separate visiting toom for well children – P 
More flexible visiting time – P 
Community HCP to visit pre-discharge – RN, 
P 
Ensure quick easy access to labs – MD, RN 
 
Solutions – systems and process 
Increase professional awareness – MD, RN 
Parental education through continuum of care – 
MD, RN, P 
Support groups for new and expectant parents 
– MD, RN 
MD = physician 
RN = Nurse 
P = Parent 

Neonatal jaundice 
318 
Author: 
Willis S 
 
Year: 
2002 
 
Country: 
USA 
 
ID: 229 
Study Type: 
Qualitative study 
 
Evidence Level: 
III 
 
Population 
Mother of newborn babies with 
jaundice 
 
Criteria: 
Breastfeeding babies with TsB 
> 170 micromol/litre 
 
Setting 
Hospital 
 
Demographics: 
Sample size: 47 
Mean age: 27 years 
More than half of multiparous 
mother had a previous baby with 
jaundice and ¾ had breastfed a 
previous child. 
 
Mothers interview between 2.5 and 
14.5 weeks postpartum 
Half of the mothers described how 
jaundice had influenced, positive or 
negatively their breastfeeding patterns. 
 
  
  
 
 

 
319 
Appendix I 
Search strategies 
Question: Recognising jaundice and predicting hyperbilirubinaemia 
 
Ovid MEDLINE 1950 to April Week 2 2008 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_medline_230408 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 31751 
2 preterm$.tw. 28005 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 412490 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 134938 
5 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 4748 
6 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 3708 
7 or/1-6 475270 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3350 
9 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 139 
10 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2141 
11 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 148 
12 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 273 
13 exp JAUNDICE/ 9646 
14 jaundice$.ti. 9495 
15 KERNICTERUS/ 876 
16 kernicterus$.ti. 358 
17 or/8-16 19912 
18 DIAGNOSIS/ 15621 
19 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 179778 
20 history.ti. 47128 
21 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 23129 
22 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 72628 
23 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 3966 
24 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 2521 
25 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 3883 
26 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 11105 
27 UMBILICAL CORD/ 7145 
28 FETAL BLOOD/ 20781 
29 BLOOD GROUP ANTIGENS/ 14212 

Neonatal jaundice 
320 
30 COOMBS' TEST/ 3929 
31 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 2462 
32 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 19944 
33 transcutaneous$.tw. 8166 
34 bilirubinomet$.tw. 140 
35 icteromet$.tw. 29 
36 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 130 
37 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 11864 
38 end tidal.tw. 5796 
39 etco.tw. 141 
40 NOMOGRAMS/ 310 
41 nomogram$.tw. 2996 
42 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 9 
43 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 81 
44 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 89761 
45 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 37348 
46 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 1227 
47 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1785 
48 tsb.tw. 489 
49 or/18-48 541944 
50 and/7,17,49 1741 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 1st Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_cctr_230408 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1658 
2 preterm$.tw. 3020 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8235 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4126 
5 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 41 
6 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 25 
7 or/1-6 11232 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
9 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 6 
10 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 146 
11 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
12 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
13 exp JAUNDICE/ 245 
14 jaundice$.ti. 191 
15 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
16 kernicterus$.ti. 3 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
321 
17 or/8-16 525 
18 DIAGNOSIS/ 26 
19 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 2758 
20 history.ti. 707 
21 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 482 
22 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 4706 
23 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 106 
24 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 133 
25 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 223 
26 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 472 
27 UMBILICAL CORD/ 109 
28 FETAL BLOOD/ 398 
29 BLOOD GROUP ANTIGENS/ 14 
30 COOMBS' TEST/ 17 
31 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 31 
32 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 548 
33 transcutaneous$.tw. 1256 
34 bilirubinomet$.tw. 6 
35 icteromet$.tw. 0 
36 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 17 
37 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 258 
38 end tidal.tw. 1265 
39 etco.tw. 34 
40 NOMOGRAMS/ 4 
41 nomogram$.tw. 143 
42 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 0 
43 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 24 
44 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 2723 
45 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 1532 
46 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 104 
47 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 176 
48 tsb.tw. 22 
49 or/18-48 17006 
50 and/7,17,49 134 
 
 
CDSR, DARE 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_cdsrdare_230408 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 181 
2 preterm$.tw. 519 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN$.kw. 541 

Neonatal jaundice 
322 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 890 
5 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILIT$.kw. 5 
6 G LUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENC$.kw. 0 
7 or/1-6 1028 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
9 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
10 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
11 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
12 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 5 
13 JAUNDICE.kw. 13 
14 jaundice$.ti. 10 
15 KERNICTERUS.kw. 1 
16 kernicterus$.ti. 0 
17 or/8-16 18 
18 DIAGNOSIS.kw. 821 
19 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 69 
20 history.ti. 22 
21 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION$.kw. 56 
22 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 931 
23 SKIN PIGMENTATION.kw. 3 
24 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 25 
25 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 13 
26 BILIRUBIN.kw. 4 
27 UMBILICAL CORD.kw. 7 
28 FETAL BLOOD.kw. 2 
29 BLOOD GROUP ANTIGEN$.kw. 0 
30 COOMBS' TEST.kw. 0 
31 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 4 
32 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 121 
33 transcutaneous$.tw. 195 
34 bilirubinomet$.tw. 0 
35 icteromet$.tw. 0 
36 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 1 
37 CARBON MONOXIDE.kw. 5 
38 end tidal.tw. 10 
39 etco.tw. 1 
40 NOMOGRAM$.kw. 0 
41 nomogram$.tw. 6 
42 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 0 
43 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 2 
44 RISK ASSESSMENT$.kw. 213 
45 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 1095 
46 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 13 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
323 
47 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 21 
48 tsb.tw. 1 
49 or/18-48 2884 
50 and/7,17,49 9 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 16 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_embase_230408 
 
# Searches Results 
1 PREMATURITY/ 27937 
2 preterm$.tw. 25261 
3 NEWBORN/ 174081 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 94136 
5 exp BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 2541 
6 GLUCOSE 6 PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 1474 
7 or/1-6 235354 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5333 
9 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1025 
10 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 15 
11 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 237 
12 JAUNDICE/ 9237 
13 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1660 
14 jaundice$.ti. 3561 
15 KERNICTERUS/ 683 
16 kernicterus$.ti. 146 
17 or/8-16 17140 
18 DIAGNOSIS/ 465073 
19 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 141323 
20 HISTORY/ 16157 
21 FAMILY HISTORY/ 24813 
22 history.ti. 24050 
23 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 56183 
24 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 60247 
25 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 4446 
26 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 2234 
27 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 2748 
28 BLOOD LEVEL/ 36543 
29 BILIRUBIN BLOOD LEVEL/ 6158 
30 CORD SERUM/ 234 
31 UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD/ 9443 
32 FETUS BLOOD/ 1630 
33 BLOOD GROUP/ 1596 

Neonatal jaundice 
324 
34 COOMBS TEST/ 1552 
35 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 1598 
36 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 16636 
37 transcutaneous$.tw. 6774 
38 bilirubinomet$.tw. 109 
39 icteromet$.tw. 11 
40 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 118 
41 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 12990 
42 end tidal.tw. 5299 
43 etco.tw. 52 
44 NOMOGRAM/ 1225 
45 nomogram$.tw. 2280 
46 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 8 
47 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 61 
48 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 163822 
49 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 35319 
50 NEWBORN ASSESSMENT/ 114 
51 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 1120 
52 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1512 
53 tsb.tw. 363 
54 or/18-53 1010463 
55 and/7,17,54 1537 
 
 
CINAHL - Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health Literature 1982 to April Week 3 2008  
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_cinahl_230408 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 5759 
2 preterm$.tw. 4893 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 36675 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 9202 
5 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 154 
6 (glucose$ adj5 deficien$).tw. 73 
7 or/1-6 41328 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 200 
9 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 134 
10 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 1 
11 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 23 
12 JAUNDICE/ 192 
13 jaundice$.ti. 279 
14 KERNICTERUS/ 92 
15 kernicterus$.ti. 36 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
325 
16 or/8-15 663 
17 DIAGNOSIS/ 1110 
18 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 9865 
19 FAMILY HISTORY/ 1191 
20 history.ti. 5984 
21 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 8809 
22 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 7 584 
23 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 134 
24 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 187 
25 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 118 
26 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 231 
27 UMBILICAL CORD/ 420 
28 FETAL BLOOD/ 749 
29 BLOOD GROUPS/ 164 
30 COOMBS' TEST/ 31 
31 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 54 
32 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 692 
33 transcutaneous$.tw. 867 
34 bilirubinomet$.tw. 19 
35 icteromet$.tw. 1 
36 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 14 
37 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 410 
38 end tidal.tw. 350 
39 etco.tw. 32 
40 nomogram$.tw. 157 
41 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 1 
42 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 8 
43 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 13435 
44 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 6295 
45 NEONATAL ASSESSMENT/ 875 
46 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 69 
47 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 61 
48 tsb.tw. 30 
49 or/17-48 53123 
50 and/7,16,49 162 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_cinahl_230408_6 
 
Wednesday, May 06, 2009 9:25:37 AM  
#  Query  Limiters/Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  

Neonatal jaundice 
326 
S63  S5 and S17 and S62  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S62  
S18 or S19 or S20 or S21 or 
S22 or S23 or S24 or S25 or 
S26 or S27 or S28 or S29 or 
S30 or S31 or S32 or S33 or 
S34 or S35 or S36 or S37 or 
S38 or S39 or S40 or S42 or 
S43 or S44 or S45 or S46 or 
S47 or S48 or S49 or S50 or 
S51 or S52 or S53 or S54 or 
S55 or S56 or S57 or S58 or 
S59 or S60 or S61  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S61  TI tsb or AB tsb  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S60  
TI serum N3 bilirubin* N3 
level* or AB serum N3 
bilirubin* N3 level*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S59  
TI total N3 serum N3 bilirubin* 
or AB total N3 serum N3 
bilirubin*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S58  MH NEONATAL ASSESSMENT  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S57  TI risk N3 model* or AB risk 
N3 model*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S56  TI risk N3 index* or AB risk N3 
index*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S55  TI risk N3 assessment* or AB 
risk N3 assessment*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
327 
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S54  MH RISK ASSESSMENT  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S53  TI hour* N3 bilirubin* or AB 
hour* N3 bilirubin*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S52  TI bilirubin* N3 percentile* or 
AB bilirubin* N3 percentile*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S51  TI nomogram* or AB 
nomogram*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S50  TI etco or AB etco  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S49  TI end tidal or AB end tidal  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S48  MH CARBON MONOXIDE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S47  TI jaundice met* or AB 
jaundice met*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S46  TI icteromet* or AB icteromet*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S45  TI bilirubinomet* or AB Search modes - Interface - EBSCOhost  Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
328 
bilirubinomet*  Boolean/Phrase  Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S44  TI transcutaneous* or AB 
transcutaneous*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S43  TI (foetus N3 blood*) or AB 
(foetus N3 blood*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S42  TI (fetus N3 blood*) or AB 
(fetus N3 blood*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S41  TI (foetal N3 blood*) or AB 
(foetal N3 blood*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S40  TI (fetal N3 blood*) or AB (fetal 
N3 blood*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S39  TI (cord N3 blood*) or AB 
(cord N3 blood*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S38  TI (antiglobulin* N3 test*) or 
AB (antiglobulin* N3 test*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S37  TI (coomb* N3 test*) or AB 
(coomb* N3 test*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S36  MH COOMBS' TEST  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
329 
Full Text  
S35  MH BLOOD GROUPS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S34  MH FETAL BLOOD  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S33  MH UMBILICAL CORD  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S32  (MH ‘BILIRUBIN/BL’)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S31  TI (examin* N3 stool*) or AB 
(examin* N3 stool*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S30  TI (examin* N3 urine) or AB 
(examin* N3 urine)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S29  TI (stool* N3 color*) or AB 
(stool* N3 colour*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S28  TI (urine N3 color*) or AB 
(urine N3 colour*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S27  TI (skin N3 color*) or AB (skin 
N3 colour*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S26  MH SKIN PIGMENTATION  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
330 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S25  TI (physical* N3 examin*) or 
AB (physical* N3 examin*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S24  TI (visual* N3 examin*) or AB 
(visual* N3 examin*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S23  TI (clinical* N3 examin*) or AB 
(clinical* N3 examin*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S22  MH PHYSICAL EXAMINATION  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S21  TI history  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S20  MH FAMILY HISTORY  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S19  TI (prediction or predicting or 
recogni* or detection)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S18  MH DIAGNOSIS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S17  
S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or S10 or 
S11 or S12 or S13 or S14 or 
S15  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
331 
S16  (TI ‘kernicterus*’)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S15  MH KERNICTERUS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S14  (TI jaundice*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S12  (AB ‘hyperbilirubin*’ N3 
‘encephalopath*’)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S11  (TI ‘hyperbilirubin*’ N3 
‘encephalopath*’)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S10  (AB ‘bilirubin*’ N3 
‘encephalopath*’)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S9  (TI ‘bilirubin*’ N3 
‘encephalopath*’)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S8  (TI ‘bilirubinaemia’ OR 
‘bilirubinemia’)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S7  (TI ‘hyperbilirubinemia’ or 
‘hyperbilirubinaemia’)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
332 
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S6  MH HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S4  
(TI ‘newborn*’ or ‘neonate*’) 
or (AB ‘newborn*’ or 
‘neonate*’)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S2  (TI ‘preterm*’) or (AB 
‘preterm*’)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S1  MH INFANT, PREMATURE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display 
 
 
Ovid MEDLINE 1950 to June Week 4 2008 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_economic_medline_090708 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 75877 
2 cost effective$.tw. 43549 
3 economic.tw. 65215 
4 or/1-3 160435 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 480 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 2016 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 160205 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 32498 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
333 
9 preterm$.tw. 28724 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 420292 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 137294 
12 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 4831 
13 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 3757 
14 or/8-13 484157 
15 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3398 
16 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 157 
17 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2174 
18 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 148 
19 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 282 
20 exp JAUNDICE/ 9967 
21 jaundice$.ti. 9785 
22 KERNICTERUS/ 891 
23 kernicterus$.ti. 361 
24 or/15-23 20452 
25 DIAGNOSIS/ 15941 
26 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 183186 
27 history.ti. 48172 
28 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 23519 
29 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 74495 
30 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 4079 
31 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 2598 
32 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 3968 
33 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 11319 
34 UMBILICAL CORD/ 7264 
35 FETAL BLOOD/ 21153 
36 BLOOD GROUP ANTIGENS/ 14483 
37 COOMBS' TEST/ 3978 
38 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 2486 
39 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 20418 
40 transcutaneous$.tw. 8286 
41 bilirubinomet$.tw. 144 
42 icteromet$.tw. 29 
43 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 135 
44 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 12056 
45 end tidal.tw. 5867 
46 etco.tw. 144 
47 NOMOGRAMS/ 346 
48 nomogram$.tw. 3080 
49 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 10 
50 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 82 
51 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 93027 

Neonatal jaundice 
334 
52 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 38546 
53 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 1256 
54 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1820 
55 tsb.tw. 497 
56 or/25-55 554568 
57 and/14,24,56 1800 
58 and/7,57 17 
59 limit 58 to english language 15 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 2nd Quarter 2008  
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_economic_cctr_090708 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 5343 
2 cost effective$.tw. 4066 
3 economic.tw. 2244 
4 or/1-3 8799 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 38 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 178 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 8789 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1688 
9 preterm$.tw. 3060 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8341 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4171 
12 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 41 
13 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 25 
14 or/8-13 11364 
15 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
16 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 8 
17 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 147 
18 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
19 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
20 exp JAUNDICE/ 247 
21 jaundice$.ti. 192 
22 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
23 kernicterus$.ti. 3 
24 or/15-23 531 
25 DIAGNOSIS/ 26 
26 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 2797 
27 history.ti. 718 
28 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 487 
29 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 4818 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
335 
30 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 107 
31 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 136 
32 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 228 
33 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 478 
34 UMBILICAL CORD/ 112 
35 FETAL BLOOD/ 404 
36 BLOOD GROUP ANTIGENS/ 14 
37 COOMBS' TEST/ 17 
38 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 31 
39 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 555 
40 transcutaneous$.tw. 1266 
41 bilirubinomet$.tw. 6 
42 icteromet$.tw. 0 
43 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 19 
44 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 264 
45 end tidal.tw. 1279 
46 etco.tw. 34 
47 NOMOGRAMS/ 7 
48 nomogram$.tw. 146 
49 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 0 
50 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 24 
51 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 2861 
52 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 1568 
53 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 108 
54 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 179 
55 tsb.tw. 24 
56 or/25-55 17382 
57 and/14,24,56 139 
58 and/7,57 3 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Health Technology Assessment 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_economic_hta_090708 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 1155 
2 cost effective$.tw. 915 
3 economic.tw. 682 
4 or/1-3 1657 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 0 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 0 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 1657 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 9 

Neonatal jaundice 
336 
9 preterm$.tw. 22 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 65 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 99 
12 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 1 
13 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 0 
14 or/8-13 122 
15 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 4 
16 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 1 
17 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 3 
18 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
19 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 1 
20 exp JAUNDICE/ 1 
21 jaundice$.ti. 3 
22 KERNICTERUS/ 1 
23 kernicterus$.ti. 0 
24 or/15-23 8 
25 DIAGNOSIS/ 4 
26 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 113 
27 history.ti. 7 
28 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 4 
29 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 55 
30 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 0 
31 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 1 
32 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 0 
33 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 0 
34 UMBILICAL CORD/ 1 
35 FETAL BLOOD/ 11 
36 BLOOD GROUP ANTIGENS/ 0 
37 COOMBS' TEST/ 0 
38 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 0 
39 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 15 
40 transcutaneous$.tw. 13 
41 bilirubinomet$.tw. 1 
42 icteromet$.tw. 0 
43 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 0 
44 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 1 
45 end tidal.tw. 0 
46 etco.tw. 0 
47 NOMOGRAMS/ 0 
48 nomogram$.tw. 0 
49 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 0 
50 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 0 
51 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 34 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
337 
52 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 84 
53 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 0 
54 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1 
55 tsb.tw. 1 
56 or/25-55 286 
57 and/14,24,56 3 
58 and/7,57 1 
 
 
EBM Reviews - NHS Economic Evaluation Database 2nd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_economic_nhseed_090708 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 17123 
2 cost effective$.tw. 8445 
3 economic.tw. 23126 
4 or/1-3 23406 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 0 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 0 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 23406 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 74 
9 preterm$.tw. 78 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 849 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 915 
12 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 5 
13 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 2 
14 or/8-13 943 
15 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 2 
16 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 1 
17 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1 
18 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
19 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 0 
20 exp JAUNDICE/ 5 
21 jaundice$.ti. 8 
22 KERNICTERUS/ 1 
23 kernicterus$.ti. 1 
24 or/15-23 14 
25 DIAGNOSIS/ 10 
26 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 185 
27 history.ti. 34 
28 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 48 
29 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 305 
30 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 0 

Neonatal jaundice 
338 
31 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 4 
32 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 12 
33 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 4 
34 UMBILICAL CORD/ 1 
35 FETAL BLOOD/ 9 
36 BLOOD GROUP ANTIGENS/ 0 
37 COOMBS' TEST/ 1 
38 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 1 
39 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 14 
40 transcutaneous$.tw. 20 
41 bilirubinomet$.tw. 1 
42 icteromet$.tw. 0 
43 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 0 
44 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 0 
45 end tidal.tw. 6 
46 etco.tw. 0 
47 NOMOGRAMS/ 0 
48 nomogram$.tw. 6 
49 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 0 
50 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 0 
51 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 481 
52 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 624 
53 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 5 
54 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 5 
55 tsb.tw. 0 
56 or/25-55 1192 
57 and/14,24,56 3 
58 and/7,57 3 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 27 
 
JAUN_recognise_predict_economic_embase_090708 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 62745 
2 cost effective$.tw. 39866 
3 economic.tw. 51827 
4 or/1-3 130966 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 369 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 1661 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 130794 
8 PREMATURITY/ 28363 
9 preterm$.tw. 25709 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
339 
10 NEWBORN/ 175463 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 95167 
12 exp BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 2563 
13 GLUCOSE 6 PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 1496 
14 or/8-13 237679 
15 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5455 
16 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1039 
17 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 15 
18 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 243 
19 JAUNDICE/ 9422 
20 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1688 
21 jaundice$.ti. 3593 
22 KERNICTERUS/ 692 
23 kernicterus$.ti. 148 
24 or/15-23 17469 
25 DIAGNOSIS/ 465076 
26 (prediction or predicting or recogniz$ or detection).ti. 143262 
27 HISTORY/ 16293 
28 FAMILY HISTORY/ 25370 
29 history.ti. 24359 
30 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION/ 58090 
31 ((clinical$ or visual$ or physical$) adj3 examin$).tw. 61169 
32 SKIN PIGMENTATION/ 4549 
33 ((skin or urine or stool$) adj3 colo?r$).tw. 2276 
34 ((urine or stool$) adj3 examin$).tw. 2785 
35 BLOOD LEVEL/ 36799 
36 BILIRUBIN BLOOD LEVEL/ 6389 
37 CORD SERUM/ 237 
38 UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD/ 9570 
39 FETUS BLOOD/ 1638 
40 BLOOD GROUP/ 1604 
41 COOMBS TEST/ 1573 
42 ((coomb$ or antiglobulin$) adj3 test$).tw. 1608 
43 ((cord or fetal or foetal or fetus or foetus) adj3 blood$).tw. 16829 
44 transcutaneous$.tw. 6839 
45 bilirubinomet$.tw. 111 
46 icteromet$.tw. 11 
47 (jaundice?met$ or jaundice met$).tw. 120 
48 CARBON MONOXIDE/ 13178 
49 end tidal.tw. 5354 
50 etco.tw. 52 
51 NOMOGRAM/ 1273 
52 nomogram$.tw. 2336 

Neonatal jaundice 
340 
53 (bilirubin$ adj3 percentile$).tw. 9 
54 (hour$ adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 63 
55 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 167602 
56 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 36102 
57 NEWBORN ASSESSMENT/ 130 
58 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 1145 
59 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1544 
60 tsb.tw. 372 
61 or/25-60 1020724 
62 and/14,24,61 1568 
63 and/7,62 24 
 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
341 
Question: Risk Factors 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to July Week 5 2008 
 
JAUN_risk_factors_medline_070808 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 32701 
2 preterm$.tw. 28961 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 422670 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 137993 
5 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 4845 
6 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 3767 
7 or/1-6 486794 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3407 
9 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 163 
10 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2187 
11 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
12 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 283 
13 exp JAUNDICE/ 10019 
14 jaundice$.ti. 9818 
15 KERNICTERUS/ 893 
16 kernicterus$.ti. 363 
17 or/8-16 20536 
18 or/13-14 15665 
19 or/8-10 4640 
20 and/18-19 602 
21 and/7,20 258 
22 or/15-16 986 
23 or/18-19 19703 
24 or/12,22 1163 
25 and/23-24 422 
26 and/7,25 328 
27 RISK FACTORS/ 364028 
28 risk factor$.ti. 44766 
29 COMORBIDITY/ 36477 
30 "CONFOUNDING FACTORS (EPIDEMIOLOGY)"/ 6456 
31 or/27-30 402101 
32 and/7,17,31 251 
33 or/21,26,32 747 
34 from 33 keep 1-10 10 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_risk_factors_cctr_070808 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
342 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1709 
2 preterm$.tw. 3074 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8435 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4189 
5 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 41 
6 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 25 
7 or/1-6 11437 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
9 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 10 
10 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 148 
11 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
12 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
13 exp JAUNDICE/ 251 
14 jaundice$.ti. 191 
15 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
16 kernicterus$.ti. 3 
17 or/8-16 536 
18 or/13-14 383 
19 or/8-10 191 
20 and/18-19 48 
21 and/7,20 48 
22 or/15-16 5 
23 or/18-19 526 
24 or/12,22 14 
25 and/23-24 5 
26 and/7,25 5 
27 RISK FACTORS/ 10464 
28 risk factor$.ti. 1717 
29 COMORBIDITY/ 1233 
30 "CONFOUNDING FACTORS (EPIDEMIOLOGY)"/ 224 
31 or/27-30 12242 
32 and/7,17,31 1 
33 or/21,26,32 53 
 
 
CDSR, DARE 
 
JAUN_risk_factors_cdsrdare_070808 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 194 
2 preterm$.tw. 550 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 579 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 946 
5 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY.kw. 1 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
343 
6 GLUCOSEPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY.kw. 0 
7 or/1-6 1091 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
9 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
10 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
11 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
12 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 5 
13 JAUNDICE.kw. 13 
14 jaundice$.ti. 10 
15 KERNICTERUS.kw. 1 
16 kernicterus$.ti. 0 
17 or/8-16 18 
18 or/13-14 15 
19 or/8-10 4 
20 and/18-19 3 
21 and/7,20 3 
22 or/15-16 1 
23 or/18-19 16 
24 or/12,22 6 
25 and/23-24 4 
26 and/7,25 4 
27 RISK FACTORS.kw. 577 
28 risk factor$.ti. 24 
29 COMORBIDITY.kw. 39 
30 "CONFOUNDING FACTORS (EPIDEMIOLOGY)".kw. 0 
31 or/27-30 611 
32 and/7,17,31 0 
33 or/21,26,32 5 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 31 
 
JAUN_risk_factors_embase_070808 
 
# Searches Results 
1 PREMATURITY/ 28534 
2 preterm$.tw. 25873 
3 NEWBORN/ 175887 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 95506 
5 exp BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 2570 
6 GLUCOSE 6 PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 1508 
7 or/1-6 238435 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5505 
9 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1045 
10 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 15 
11 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 243 

Neonatal jaundice 
344 
12 JAUNDICE/ 9491 
13 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1705 
14 jaundice$.ti. 3602 
15 KERNICTERUS/ 699 
16 kernicterus$.ti. 148 
17 or/8-16 17595 
18 or/13-14 4831 
19 or/8-10 5731 
20 and/18-19 775 
21 and/7,20 571 
22 or/15-16 702 
23 or/18-19 9787 
24 or/12,22 10101 
25 and/23-24 2359 
26 and/7,25 650 
27 RISK FACTOR/ 227978 
28 risk factor$.ti. 37560 
29 COMORBIDITY/ 47834 
30 confounding factor$.ti. 177 
31 or/27-30 277617 
32 and/7,17,31 290 
33 or/21,26,32 1237 
 
 
CINAHL - Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health Literature 1982 to August Week 1 2008  
 
JAUN_risk_factors_cinahl_070808 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 5661 
2 preterm$.tw. 4757 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 36594 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 9089 
5 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 151 
6 (glucose$ adj5 deficien$).tw. 71 
7 or/1-6 41326 
8 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 201 
9 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 127 
10 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 1 
11 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 22 
12 JAUNDICE/ 205 
13 jaundice$.ti. 282 
14 KERNICTERUS/ 86 
15 kernicterus$.ti. 35 
16 or/8-15 667 
17 or/12-13 400 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
345 
 
18 or/8-9 
 265 
19 and/17-18 
 42 
20 and/7,19 
 31 
21 or/14-15 
 89 
22 or/17-18 
 623 
23 or/11,21 
 101 
24 and/22-23 
 58 
25 and/7,24 
 57 
26 RISK FACTORS/ 30074 
27 risk factor$.ti. 6903 
28 COMORBIDITY/ 9000 
29 confounding factor$.ti. 27 
30 or/26-29 
 42220 
31 and/7,16,30 
 25 
32 or/20,25,31 
 98 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_risk_factors_cinahl_ebsco_070808 
 
Friday, May 15, 2009 4:01:43 AM  
#  Query  Limiters/Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S33  S21 or S25 or S32  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
113  
S32  S7 and S17 and S31  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
32  
S31  S27 or S28 or S29 or S30  Search modes - Interface - 51515  

Neonatal jaundice 
346 
Boolean/Phrase  EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S30  TI confounding factor*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
30  
S29  MH COMORBIDITY  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
11607  
S28  TI risk factor*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
8349  
S27  MH RISK FACTORS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
36180  
S26  S7 AND S25  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
71  
S25  S18 AND S24  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
84  
S24  S23 or S22  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
416  
S23  S8 or S9 or S10 or S11 or S12  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  343  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
347 
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S22  S15 or S16  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
119  
S21  S7 and S20  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
43  
S20  S18 and S19  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
56  
S19  S8 or S9  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
328  
S18  S13 or S14  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
476  
S17  S8 or S9 or S10 or S11 or S12 
or S13 or S14 or S15 or S16  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
808  
S16  TI kernicterus  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
49  
S15  MH KERNICTERUS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
116  

Neonatal jaundice 
348 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S14  TI jaundice*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
329  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
255  
S12  
TI (hyperbilirubin* N3 
encephalopath*) or AB 
(hyperbilirubin* N3 
encephalopath*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
3  
S11  
TI (bilirubin* N3 
encephalopath*) or AB 
(bilirubin* N3 encephalopath*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
33  
S10  TI (bilirubinemi*) or TI 
(bilirubinaemi*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
1  
S9  TI (hyperbilirubinemi*) or TI 
(hyperbilirubinaemi*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
163  
S8  MH HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
246  
S7  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4 or S5 or S6  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
48069  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
349 
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S6  TI (glucose N5 deficien*) or AB 
(glucose N5 deficien*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
95  
S5  MH BLOOD GROUP 
INCOMPATIBILITY+  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
640  
S4  
(TI "newborn*" or "neonate*") 
or (AB "newborn*" or 
"neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
10924  
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
41919  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB 
"preterm*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
5983  
S1  MH INFANT, PREMATURE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - 
EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
6767 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
350 
Question: What should be included in a formal assessment of a baby with neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? 
 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to August Week 4 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_medline_050908 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 32828 
2 preterm$.tw. 29140 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 424141 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 138590 
5 or/1-4 481742 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3415 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 167 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2193 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 285 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 10042 
12 jaundice$.ti. 9833 
13 or/6-12 20019 
14 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS/ 11340 
15 TSH.tw. 20277 
16 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 6085 
17 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 11 
18 thyrotropin.ti. 7579 
19 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 8 
20 ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASES/bl 14602 
21 AST.ti. 206 
22 ALANINE TRANSAMINASE/bl 15564 
23 ALT.ti. 344 
24 ALAKALINE PHOSPHATASE/bl 0 
25 ALP.ti. 133 
26 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE/bl 3768 
27 GGT.ti. 126 
28 HEMOGLOBINS/ 51157 
29 h?emoglobin$.ti. 30783 
30 HEMATOCRIT/ 29026 
31 h?ematocrit$.ti. 2251 
32 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 1229 
33 RETICULOCYTE COUNT/ 704 
34 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 2173 
35 BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS/ 17340 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
351 
36 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 5204 
37 (ABG and arterial).tw. 243 
38 SERUM ALBUMIN/ 35634 
39 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 42168 
40 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 1268 
41 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1838 
42 tsb.tw. 510 
43 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 11384 
44 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 855 
45 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 3 
46 URINALYSIS/ 2820 
47 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 12349 
48 or/14-47 252812 
49 and/5,13,48 1573 
50 limit 49 to humans 1490 
51 limit 50 to english language 1171 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_cctr_050908 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1709 
2 preterm$.tw. 3074 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8435 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4189 
5 or/1-4 11391 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 10 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 148 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 251 
12 jaundice$.ti. 191 
13 or/6-12 533 
14 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS/ 168 
15 TSH.tw. 875 
16 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 294 
17 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 1 
18 thyrotropin.ti. 231 
19 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 0 
20 ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASES/bl 584 
21 AST.ti. 18 

Neonatal jaundice 
352 
22 ALANINE TRANSAMINASE/bl 876 
23 ALT.ti. 56 
24 ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE/bl 763 
25 ALP.ti. 2 
26 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE/bl 169 
27 GGT.ti. 2 
28 HEMOGLOBINS/ 1869 
29 h?emoglobin$.ti. 502 
30 HEMATOCRIT/ 1204 
31 h?ematocrit$.ti. 88 
32 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 13 
33 RETICULOCYTE COUNT/ 94 
34 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 227 
35 Blood GAS ANALYSIS/ 831 
36 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 357 
37 (ABG and arterial).tw. 27 
38 SERUM ALBUMIN/ 742 
39 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 1295 
40 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 110 
41 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 183 
42 tsb.tw. 24 
43 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 483 
44 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 19 
45 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
46 URINALYSIS/ 102 
47 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 1091 
48 or/14-47 10361 
49 and/5,13,48 129 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_cdsrdare_050908 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 207 
2 preterm$.tw. 560 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 595 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 954 
5 or/1-4 1104 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
353 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 5 
11 JAUNDICE.kw. 13 
12 jaundice$.ti. 10 
13 or/6-12 18 
14 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS.kw. 1 
15 TSH.tw. 27 
16 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 24 
17 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 0 
18 thyrotropin.ti. 2 
19 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 0 
20 ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASES.kw. 2 
21 AST.ti. 0 
22 ALANINE TRANSAMINASE.kw. 8 
23 ALT.ti. 0 
24 ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE.kw. 0 
25 ALP.ti. 0 
26 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE.kw. 2 
27 GGT.ti. 0 
28 HEMOGLOBINS.kw. 14 
29 h?emoglobin$.ti. 6 
30 HEMATOCRIT.kw. 7 
31 h?ematocrit$.ti. 1 
32 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 3 
33 RETICULOCYTE COUNT.kw. 0 
34 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 8 
35 BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS.kw. 3 
36 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 0 
37 (ABG and arterial).tw. 6 
38 SERUM ALBUMIN.kw. 9 
39 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 97 
40 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 15 
41 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 23 
42 tsb.tw. 1 
43 BILIRUBIN.kw. 4 
44 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 5 
45 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
46 URINALYSIS.kw. 10 
47 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 143 
48 or/14-47 352 
49 and/5,13,48 7 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
354 
CINAHL - Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health Literature 1982 to September Week 1 
2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_cinahl_050908 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 6174 
2 preterm$.tw. 5276 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 38718 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 9765 
5 or/1-4 43532 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 212 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 142 
8 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 1 
9 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 26 
10 JAUNDICE/ 215 
11 jaundice$.ti. 301 
12 or/6-11 678 
13 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS/ 387 
14 TSH.tw. 195 
15 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 226 
16 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 2 
17 thyrotropin.ti. 30 
18 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 0 
19 ASPARATE AMINOTRANSFERASE/ 0 
20 AST.ti. 99 
21 ALANINE AMINOTRANSFERASE/ 381 
22 ALT.ti. 26 
23 ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE/ 386 
24 ALP.ti. 5 
25 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE/ 105 
26 GGT.ti. 8 
27 HEMOGLOBINS/ or HEMOGLOBIN A, GLYCOSYLATED/ 4835 
28 h?emoglobin$.ti. 660 
29 Hematocrit/ 910 
30 h?ematocrit$.ti. 110 
31 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 49 
32 RETICULOCYTE COUNT/ 36 
33 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 88 
34 BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS/ 1598 
35 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 380 
36 (ABG and arterial).tw. 64 
37 SERUM ALBUMIN/ 808 
38 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 835 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
355 
39 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 76 
40 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 70 
41 tsb.tw. 34 
42 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 259 
43 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 22 
44 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 1 
45 URINALYSIS/ 2158 
46 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 700 
47 or/13-46 12776 
48 and/5,12,47 128 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_cinahl_050908_4 
#  Query  Limiters/Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S55  S5 and S15 and S54  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S54  
S16 or S17 or S18 or S19 or S20 or 
S21 or S22 or S23 or S24 or S25 or 
S26 or S27 or S28 or S29 or S30 or 
S31 or S32 or S33 or S34 or S35 or 
S36 or S37 or S38 or S39 or S40 or 
S41 or S42 or S43 or S44 or S45 or 
S46 or S47 or S48 or S49 or S50 or 
S51 or S52 or S53  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S53  
AB (urine N3 test*) or AB (urine 
N3 check*) or AB (urine N3 
analysis) or AB (urine N3 analyses) 
or AB (urine N3 level*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S52  
TI (urine N3 test*) or TI (urine N3 
check*) or TI (urine N3 analysis) or 
TI (urine N3 analyses) or TI (urine 
N3 level*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S51  MH URINALYSIS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S50  TI (split bilirubin) or AB (split 
bilirubin)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
356 
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S49  TI (unconjugated N3 bilirubin) or 
AB (unconjugated N3 bilirubin)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S48  MH BILIRUBIN/BL  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S47  TI (tsb) or AB (tsb)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S46  TI (serum albumin level*) or AB 
(total serum level*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S45  TI (total serum albumin) or AB 
(total serum albumin)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S44  TI (plasma N3 albumin) or AB 
(plasma N3 albumin)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S43  TI (serum N3 albumin) or AB 
(serum N3 albumin)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S42  MH SERUM ALBUMIN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S41  AB (ABG) and AB (arterial)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S40  TI (ABG) and TI (arterial)  Search modes - Interface - EBSCOhost  Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
357 
Boolean/Phrase  Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S39  TI (blood gas*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S38  MH BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S37  TI ( reticulocyte* N3 number*) or 
AB (reticulocyte* N3 number*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S36  TI ( reticulocyte* N3 count*) or AB 
(reticulocyte* N3 count*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S35  MH RETICULOCYTE COUNT  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S34  TI (peripheral blood smear*) or AB 
(peripheral blood smear*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S33  MH HEMATOCRIT  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S32  TI (haemoglobin* or hemoglobin*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S31  MH HEMOGLOBIN A, 
GLYCOSYLATED  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
358 
with Full Text  
S30  MH HEMOGLOBINS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S29  TI (GGT)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S28  MH GAMMA-
GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S27  TI (ALP)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S26  MH ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S25  TI (ALT)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S24  MH ALANINE 
AMINOTRANSFERASE  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S23  TI (AST)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S22  MH ASPARTATE 
AMINOTRANSFERASE  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S21  TI (urine reducing substance*) or 
AB ((urine reducing substance*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
359 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S20  TI (thyrotropin) or AB ((thyrotropin)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S19  
TI (thyroidstimulating N3 
hormone*) or AB 
(thyroidstimulating N3 hormone*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S18  
TI (thyroid stimulating hormone*) 
or AB (thyroid stimulating 
hormone*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S17  TI (tsb) or AB (tsb)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S16  MH THYROID FUNCTION TESTS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S15  S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or S10 or S11 
or S12 or S13 or S14  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S14  (TI jaundice*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S12  (AB "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
360 
S11  (TI "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S10  (AB "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S9  (TI "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S8  (TI "bilirubinaemia" OR 
"bilirubinemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S7  (TI "hyperbilirubinemia" or 
"hyperbilirubinaemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S6  MH HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S4  (TI "newborn*" or "neonate*") or 
(AB "newborn*" or "neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB "preterm*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
361 
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S1  MH INFANT, PREMATURE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
362 
Question: What should be included in a formal assessment of a baby with neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? Search 2. GDG requested a search on three additional tests G6PD, Coomb's 
and complete blood count. 
 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to October Week 1 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_SEARCH2_medline_091008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 33074 
2 preterm$.tw. 29486 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 426267 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 139364 
5 or/1-4 484217 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3433 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 176 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2206 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 286 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 10081 
12 jaundice$.ti. 9855 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 896 
14 kernicterus$.ti. 363 
15 or/6-14 20648 
16 Glucosephosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency/ 3783 
17 Coombs' Test/ 4021 
18 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 4890 
19 G6PD.tw. 2704 
20 BLOOD CELL COUNT/ 17683 
21 complete blood count$.tw. 1926 
22 or/16-21 33131 
23 and/5,15,22 476 
24 limit 23 to (english language and humans) 314 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_SEARCH2_cctr_091008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1709 
2 preterm$.tw. 3074 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8435 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4189 
5 or/1-4 11391 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
363 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 10 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 148 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 251 
12 jaundice$.ti. 191 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
14 kernicterus$.ti. 3 
15 or/6-14 536 
16 Glucosephosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency/ 25 
17 Coombs' Test/ 18 
18 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 41 
19 G6PD.tw. 26 
20 BLOOD CELL COUNT/ 542 
21 complete blood count$.tw. 157 
22 or/16-21 785 
23 and/5,15,22 19 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_SEARCH2_cdsrdare_091008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 207 
2 preterm$.tw,tx. 560 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 595 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw,tx. 954 
5 or/1-4 1104 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw,tx. 5 
11 JAUNDICE.kw. 13 
12 jaundice$.ti. 10 
13 KERNICTERUS.kw. 1 
14 kernicterus$.ti. 0 
15 or/6-14 18 
16 Glucosephosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency.kw. 0 
17 Coombs' Test.kw. 0 
18 BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY.kw. 1 
19 G6PD.tw,tx. 6 

Neonatal jaundice 
364 
20 BLOOD CELL COUNT.kw. 4 
21 complete blood count$.tw,tx. 14 
22 or/16-21 23 
23 and/5,15,22 2 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 40 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_SEARCH2_embase_091008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 PREMATURITY/ 28910 
2 preterm$.tw. 26207 
3 NEWBORN/ 177050 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 96324 
5 or/1-4 237012 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5618 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1053 
8 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 15 
9 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 244 
10 JAUNDICE/ 9651 
11 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1719 
12 jaundice$.ti. 3621 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 704 
14 kernicterus$.ti. 149 
15 or/6-14 17878 
16 GLUCOSE 6 PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY/ 1527 
17 G6PD.tw. 2020 
18 COOMBS TEST/ 1620 
19 exp BLOOD CELL COUNT/ 64937 
20 complete blood count$.tw. 1670 
21 exp BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY/ 2599 
22 or/16-21 72155 
23 and/5,15,22 381 
 
 
CINAHL - Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health 
Literature 1982 to October Week 1 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_SEARCH2_cinahl_091008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 6268 
2 preterm$.tw. 5352 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 39143 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
365 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 9892 
5 or/1-4 44044 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 215 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 143 
8 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 1 
9 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 27 
10 JAUNDICE/ 221 
11 jaundice$.ti. 301 
12 Kernicterus/ 101 
13 kernicterus$.ti. 40 
14 or/6-13 727 
15 G6PD.tw. 45 
16 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.tw. 88 
17 Coombs' Test/ 34 
18 exp Blood Group Incompatibility/ 580 
19 Blood Cell Count/ 569 
20 complete blood count$.tw. 187 
21 or/15-20 1395 
22 and/5,14,21 126 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_search2_cinahl_091008_2 
#  Query  Limiters/Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S25  S5 and S17 and S24  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S24  S18 or S19 or S20 or S21 or 
S22 or S23  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S23  TI (complete blood count*) or 
AB (complete blood count*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S22  MH BLOOD CELL COUNT  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S21  MH BLOOD GROUP Search modes - Interface - EBSCOhost  Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
366 
INCOMPATIBILITY+  Boolean/Phrase  Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S20  MH COOMBS' TEST  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S19  
TI (glucose 6 phosphate 
dehydrogenase) or AB (glucose 
6 phosphate dehydrogenase)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S18  TI (G6PD) or AB (G6PD)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S17  
S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or S10 or 
S11 or S12 or S13 or S14 or 
S15 or S16  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S16  (TI "kernicterus*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S15  MH KERNICTERUS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S14  (TI jaundice*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S12  (AB "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
367 
Full Text  
S11  (TI "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S10  (AB "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S9  (TI "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S8  (TI "bilirubinaemia" OR 
"bilirubinemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S7  (TI "hyperbilirubinemia" or 
"hyperbilirubinaemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S6  MH HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S4  
(TI "newborn*" or "neonate*") 
or (AB "newborn*" or 
"neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB 
"preterm*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
368 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S1  MH INFANT, PREMATURE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display 
 
 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
369 
Question: What should be included in a formal assessment of a baby with neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia? Economic Evaluation 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to September Week 3 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_economic_medline_240908 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 77470 
2 cost effective$.tw. 44545 
3 economic.tw. 66685 
4 or/1-3 163873 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 486 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 2052 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 163640 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 32893 
9 preterm$.tw. 29239 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 424897 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 138853 
12 or/8-11 482616 
13 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3420 
14 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 173 
15 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2198 
16 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
17 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 286 
18 exp JAUNDICE/ 10062 
19 jaundice$.ti. 9844 
20 or/13-19 20052 
21 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS/ 11346 
22 TSH.tw. 20306 
23 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 6104 
24 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 11 
25 thyrotropin.ti. 7581 
26 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 8 
27 ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASES/bl 14626 
28 AST.ti. 206 
29 ALANINE TRANSAMINASE/bl 15609 
30 ALT.ti. 344 
31 ALAKALINE PHOSPHATASE/bl 0 
32 ALP.ti. 133 
33 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE/bl 3777 
34 GGT.ti. 126 
35 HEMOGLOBINS/ 51235 
36 h?emoglobin$.ti. 30815 

Neonatal jaundice 
370 
37 HEMATOCRIT/ 29045 
38 h?ematocrit$.ti. 2251 
39 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 1233 
40 RETICULOCYTE COUNT/ 705 
41 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 2177 
42 BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS/ 17355 
43 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 5207 
44 (ABG and arterial).tw. 244 
45 SERUM ALBUMIN/ 35685 
46 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 42274 
47 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 1281 
48 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1850 
49 tsb.tw. 512 
50 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 11401 
51 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 859 
52 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 3 
53 URINALYSIS/ 2841 
54 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 12386 
55 or/21-54 253225 
56 and/12,20,55 1576 
57 limit 56 to humans 1493 
58 limit 57 to english language 1173 
59 and/7,12,20,58 14 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_economic_cctr_240908 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 5410 
2 cost effective$.tw. 4135 
3 economic.tw. 2275 
4 or/1-3 8908 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 38 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 178 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 8898 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1709 
9 preterm$.tw. 3074 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8435 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4189 
12 or/8-11 11391 
13 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
14 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 10 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
371 
15 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 148 
16 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
17 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
18 exp JAUNDICE/ 251 
19 jaundice$.ti. 191 
20 or/13-19 533 
21 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS/ 168 
22 TSH.tw. 875 
23 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 294 
24 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 1 
25 thyrotropin.ti. 231 
26 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 0 
27 ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASES/bl 584 
28 AST.ti. 18 
29 ALANINE TRANSAMINASE/bl 876 
30 ALT.ti. 56 
31 ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE/bl 763 
32 ALP.ti. 2 
33 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE/bl 169 
34 GGT.ti. 2 
35 HEMOGLOBINS/ 1869 
36 h?emoglobin$.ti. 502 
37 HEMATOCRIT/ 1204 
38 h?ematocrit$.ti. 88 
39 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 13 
40 RETICULOCYTE COUNT/ 94 
41 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 227 
42 Blood GAS ANALYSIS/ 831 
43 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 357 
44 (ABG and arterial).tw. 27 
45 SERUM ALBUMIN/ 742 
46 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 1295 
47 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 110 
48 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 183 
49 tsb.tw. 24 
50 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 483 
51 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 19 
52 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
53 URINALYSIS/ 102 
54 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 1091 
55 or/21-54 10361 
56 and/7,12,20,55 3 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
372 
 
EBM Reviews - Health Technology Assessment 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_economic_hta_240908 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 1155 
2 cost effective$.tw. 915 
3 economic.tw. 682 
4 or/1-3 1657 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 0 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 0 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 1657 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 9 
9 preterm$.tw. 22 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 65 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 99 
12 or/8-11 121 
13 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 4 
14 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 1 
15 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 3 
16 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
17 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 1 
18 exp JAUNDICE/ 1 
19 jaundice$.ti. 3 
20 or/13-19 8 
21 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS/ 3 
22 TSH.tw. 1 
23 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 2 
24 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 0 
25 thyrotropin.ti. 0 
26 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 0 
27 ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASES/bl 0 
28 AST.ti. 0 
29 ALANINE TRANSAMINASE/bl 0 
30 ALT.ti. 0 
31 ALAKALINE PHOSPHATASE/bl 0 
32 ALP.ti. 0 
33 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE/bl 0 
34 GGT.ti. 0 
35 HEMOGLOBINS/ 2 
36 h?emoglobin$.ti. 9 
37 HEMATOCRIT/ 1 
38 h?ematocrit$.ti. 0 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
373 
39 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 0 
40 RETICULOCYTE COUNT/ 0 
41 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 0 
42 BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS/ 3 
43 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 2 
44 (ABG and arterial).tw. 0 
45 SERUM ALBUMIN/ 5 
46 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 7 
47 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 0 
48 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1 
49 tsb.tw. 1 
50 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 0 
51 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
52 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
53 URINALYSIS/ 5 
54 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 7 
55 or/21-54 38 
56 and/7,12,20,55 1 
 
 
EBM Reviews - NHS Economic Evaluation Database 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_economic_nhseed_240908 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 17348 
2 cost effective$.tw. 8488 
3 economic.tw. 23373 
4 or/1-3 23646 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 0 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 0 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 23646 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 77 
9 preterm$.tw. 79 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 861 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 925 
12 or/8-11 948 
13 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 2 
14 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 1 
15 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1 
16 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
17 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 0 
18 exp JAUNDICE/ 5 
19 jaundice$.ti. 8 

Neonatal jaundice 
374 
20 or/13-19 14 
21 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS/ 1 
22 TSH.tw. 8 
23 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 12 
24 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 0 
25 thyrotropin.ti. 2 
26 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 0 
27 ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASES/bl 1 
28 AST.ti. 0 
29 ALANINE TRANSAMINASE/bl 10 
30 ALT.ti. 0 
31 ALAKALINE PHOSPHATASE/bl 0 
32 ALP.ti. 0 
33 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE/bl 0 
34 GGT.ti. 0 
35 HEMOGLOBINS/ 34 
36 h?emoglobin$.ti. 14 
37 HEMATOCRIT/ 17 
38 h?ematocrit$.ti. 1 
39 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 0 
40 RETICULOCYTE COUNT/ 3 
41 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 7 
42 BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS/ 9 
43 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 3 
44 (ABG and arterial).tw. 3 
45 SERUM ALBUMIN/ 13 
46 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 29 
47 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 5 
48 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 5 
49 tsb.tw. 0 
50 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 4 
51 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
52 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
53 URINALYSIS/ 24 
54 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 50 
55 or/21-54 209 
56 and/7,12,20,55 3 
 
 
EBM Reviews - NHS Economic Evaluation Database 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_assess_tests_hyperbil_economic_nhseed_240908 
 
# Searches Results 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
375 
1 costs.tw. 17348 
2 cost effective$.tw. 8488 
3 economic.tw. 23373 
4 or/1-3 23646 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 0 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 0 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 23646 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 77 
9 preterm$.tw. 79 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 861 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 925 
12 or/8-11 948 
13 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 2 
14 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 1 
15 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1 
16 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
17 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 0 
18 exp JAUNDICE/ 5 
19 jaundice$.ti. 8 
20 or/13-19 14 
21 THYROID FUNCTION TESTS/ 1 
22 TSH.tw. 8 
23 (thyroid adj3 stimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 12 
24 (thyroidstimulating adj3 hormone$).tw. 0 
25 thyrotropin.ti. 2 
26 (urine adj3 reducing adj3 substance$).tw. 0 
27 ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASES/bl 1 
28 AST.ti. 0 
29 ALANINE TRANSAMINASE/bl 10 
30 ALT.ti. 0 
31 ALAKALINE PHOSPHATASE/bl 0 
32 ALP.ti. 0 
33 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE/bl 0 
34 GGT.ti. 0 
35 HEMOGLOBINS/ 34 
36 h?emoglobin$.ti. 14 
37 HEMATOCRIT/ 17 
38 h?ematocrit$.ti. 1 
39 (peripheral adj3 blood adj3 smear$).tw. 0 
40 RETICULOCYTE COUNT/ 3 
41 (reticulocyte$ adj3 (count$ or number$)).tw. 7 
42 BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS/ 9 
43 (blood adj3 gas$).ti. 3 

Neonatal jaundice 
376 
44 (ABG and arterial).tw. 3 
45 SERUM ALBUMIN/ 13 
46 ((serum or plasma) adj3 albumin).tw. 29 
47 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 5 
48 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 5 
49 tsb.tw. 0 
50 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 4 
51 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
52 (split adj3 bilirubin).tw. 0 
53 URINALYSIS/ 24 
54 (urine adj3 (test$ or check$ or analys?s or level$)).tw. 50 
55 or/21-54 209 
56 and/7,12,20,55 3 
 
 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
377 
Question: How effective is phototherapy?Restricted to SRs, meta-analysis and controlled trials 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to October Week 1 2008 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_medline_131008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 266806 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 80365 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD/ 100865 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD/ 12612 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 63127 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 57538 
7 or/1-6 450144 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 98482 
9 clinical trial.pt. 459524 
10 exp CLINICAL TRIAL/ 567163 
11 exp CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC/ 213054 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 133527 
13 PLACEBOS/ 28238 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 127827 
15 random$.tw,sh. 565894 
16 or/8-15 993442 
17 or/7,16 998089 
18 META ANALYSIS/ 19747 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC/ 8778 
20 meta analysis.pt. 19747 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 34987 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 18625 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 1956 
24 or/18-23 48895 
25 review$.pt. 1430230 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or 
psychlit or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw.  31879 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 3522 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 5442 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 30059 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 1397 
31 or/26-30 63968 
32 and/25,31 27218 
33 or/24,32 64812 
34 letter.pt. 650354 
35 case report.tw. 138957 

Neonatal jaundice 
378 
36 comment.pt. 372091 
37 editorial.pt. 231976 
38 historical article.pt. 257421 
39 or/34-38 1320137 
40 17 not 39 961091 
41 33 not 39 61188 
42 or/40-41 992333 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 33074 
44 preterm$.tw. 29486 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 426267 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 139364 
47 or/43-46 484217 
48 exp PHOTOTHERAPY/ 20273 
49 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL/th [Therapy] 1470 
50 LIGHT/th [Therapy] 7 
51 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 1488 
52 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw. 176 
53 bilibed.tw. 7 
54 biliblanket$.tw. 12 
55 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 918 
56 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 1075 
57 light.ti. 55786 
58 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
59 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
60 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
61 medestime.tw. 0 
62 neoblue$.tw. 2 
63 light emitting diode$.tw. 1280 
64 (LED and light).tw. 5808 
65 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 3557 
66 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 342 
67 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 5119 
68 ohmeda.tw. 382 
69 medela.tw. 12 
70 or/48-69 89832 
71 and/42,47,70 276 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_cctr_131008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 246310 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
379 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 75338 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD/ 81099 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD/ 7643 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 20221 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 0 
7 or/1-6 317038 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 106559 
9 clinical trial.pt. 273458 
10 exp CLINICAL TRIAL/ 0 
11 exp CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC/ 0 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 35204 
13 PLACEBOS/ 18244 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 105601 
15 random$.tw,sh. 241696 
16 or/8-15 386437 
17 or/7,16 397360 
18 META ANALYSIS/ 0 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC/ 171 
20 meta analysis.pt. 476 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 1056 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 250 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 26 
24 or/18-23 1452 
25 review$.pt. 2654 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or psychlit 
or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw. 406 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 38 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 61 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 2046 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 31 
31 or/26-30 2491 
32 and/25,31 93 
33 or/24,32 1515 
34 letter.pt. 4483 
35 case report.tw. 149 
36 comment.pt. 1562 
37 editorial.pt. 280 
38 historical article.pt. 58 
39 or/34-38 5258 
40 17 not 39 392251 
41 33 not 39 1481 
42 or/40-41 392505 

Neonatal jaundice 
380 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1709 
44 preterm$.tw. 3074 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8435 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4189 
47 or/43-46 11391 
48 exp PHOTOTHERAPY/ 1159 
49 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL/th [Therapy] 94 
50 LIGHT/th [Therapy] 0 
51 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 273 
52 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw. 0 
53 bilibed.tw. 1 
54 biliblanket$.tw. 8 
55 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 5 
56 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 44 
57 light.ti. 1135 
58 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
59 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
60 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
61 medestime.tw. 0 
62 neoblue$.tw. 0 
63 light emitting diode$.tw. 50 
64 (LED and light).tw. 127 
65 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 80 
66 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 30 
67 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 129 
68 ohmeda.tw. 58 
69 medela.tw. 2 
70 or/48-69 2445 
71 and/42,47,70 164 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_cdsrdare_131008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 0 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 0 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD.kw. 225 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD.kw. 16 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION.kw. 11 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS.kw. 5625 
7 or/1-6 5668 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 3814 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
381 
9 clinical trial.pt. 0 
10 CLINICAL TRIAL.kw. 0 
11 CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC.kw. 124 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 5952 
13 PLACEBOS.kw. 107 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 5335 
15 random$.tw,sh. 11318 
16 or/8-15 11713 
17 or/7,16 11713 
18 META ANALYSIS.kw. 159 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC.kw. 26 
20 meta analysis.pt. 0 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 7880 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 7752 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 2902 
24 or/18-23 11535 
25 review$.pt. 0 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or psychlit 
or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw. 11215 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 1874 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 2540 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 5741 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 3818 
31 or/26-30 11382 
32 and/25,31 0 
33 or/24,32 11535 
34 letter.pt. 0 
35 case report.tw. 114 
36 comment.pt. 0 
37 editorial.pt. 0 
38 historical article.pt. 0 
39 or/34-38 114 
40 17 not 39 11613 
41 33 not 39 11439 
42 or/40-41 12882 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 207 
44 preterm$.tw,tx. 560 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 595 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw,tx. 954 
47 or/43-46 1104 
48 PHOTOTHERAPY.kw. 21 
49 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL.kw. 7 

Neonatal jaundice 
382 
50 LIGHT.kw. 11 
51 (light adj3 therap$).tw,tx. 51 
52 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw,tx. 0 
53 bilibed$.tw,tx. 0 
54 biliblanket$.tw,tx. 1 
55 (wallaby or wallabies).tw,tx. 1 
56 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw,tx. 12 
57 light.ti. 15 
58 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw,tx. 0 
59 hill rom microlite.tw,tx. 0 
60 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw,tx. 0 
61 medestime.tw,tx. 0 
62 neoblue$.tw,tx. 0 
63 light emitting diode$.tw,tx. 2 
64 (LED and light).tw,tx. 250 
65 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw,tx. 5 
66 (halogen adj3 light$).tw,tx. 1 
67 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw,tx. 30 
68 ohmeda.tw,tx. 2 
69 medela.tw. 0 
70 or/48-69 352 
71 and/42,47,70 42 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 41 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_embase_131008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 CLINICAL TRIALS/ 519099 
2 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).ti,ab,sh. 122674 
3 SINGLE BLIND PROCEDURE/ 7849 
4 DOUBLE BLIND PROCEDURE/ 70766 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 26330 
6 CROSSOVER PROCEDURE/ 20737 
7 PLACEBO/ 118995 
8 placebo$.ti,ab,sh. 169680 
9 random$.ti,ab,sh. 421609 
10 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 163322 
11 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj (blind$ or mask$)).ti,ab,sh. 91962 
12 randomi?ed control$ trial$.tw. 31938 
13 or/1-12 850569 
14 META ANALYSIS/ 34138 
15 ((meta adj analy$) or metaanalys$ or meta-analy$).ti,ab,sh. 43611 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
383 
16 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).ti,sh,ab. 26234 
17 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).ti,ab,sh. 1612 
18 or/14-17 60164 
19 review.pt. 898679 
20 (medline or medlars or embase).ab. 22858 
21 (scisearch or science citation index).ab. 708 
22 (psychlit or psyclit or psychinfo or psycinfo or cinahl or cochrane).ab.  8291 
23 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 2626 
24 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw. 4204 
25 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw. 24298 
26 (peto or dersimonian or "der simonian" or fixed effect).tw. 869 
27 or/20-26 51485 
28 and/19,27 18247 
29 or/18,28 70345 
30 (book or conference paper or editorial or letter or note or proceeding or short survey).pt.  1703378 
31 13 not 30 727892 
32 29 not 31 32871 
33 or/31-32 760763 
34 PREMATURITY/ 28948 
35 preterm$.tw. 26247 
36 NEWBORN/ 177181 
37 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 96416 
38 or/34-37 237226 
39 exp Phototherapy/ 23625 
40 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 1258 
41 (photoradiati$ adj3 therap$).tw. 129 
42 bilibed$.tw. 3 
43 biliblanket$.tw. 11 
44 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 635 
45 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 902 
46 exp Light/ 52208 
47 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
48 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
49 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
50 medestime.tw. 0 
51 neoblue$.tw. 1 
52 light emitting diode$.tw. 1150 
53 (LED and light).tw. 4841 
54 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 2577 
55 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 93 
56 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 4612 
57 ohmeda.tw. 410 

Neonatal jaundice 
384 
58 medela.tw. 4 
59 or/39-58 84117 
60 and/33,38,59 217 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 46 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_outcomes_Q6p4_embase_201108 
 
# Searches Results 
1 PREMATURITY/ 29089 
2 preterm$.tw. 26428 
3 NEWBORN/ 177774 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 96829 
5 or/1-4 238203 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5668 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1055 
8 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 15 
9 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 247 
10 JAUNDICE/ 9750 
11 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1734 
12 jaundice$.ti. 3635 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 708 
14 kernicterus$.ti. 149 
15 or/6-14 18031 
16 exp Phototherapy/ 23828 
17 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 1262 
18 bilibed$.tw. 3 
19 biliblanket$.tw. 11 
20 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 638 
21 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 904 
22 exp Light/ 52506 
23 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
24 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
25 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
26 medestime.tw. 0 
27 neoblue$.tw. 1 
28 light emitting diode$.tw. 1162 
29 (LED and light).tw. 4864 
30 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 2586 
31 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 93 
32 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 4637 
33 or/16-32 84205 
34 mother child relation/ 6667 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
385 
35 object relation/ 2475 
36 (bonding or bond$).tw. 88835 
37 (concern$ or worry or worries).tw. 212424 
38 Anxiety/ 46655 
39 (satisfaction or satisf$).tw. 114088 
40 bottle feeding/ or breast feeding/ 14406 
41 feed$.tw. 126279 
42 enteric feeding/ or exp parenteral nutrition/ 23201 
43 ((continu$ or intermitt$) adj3 feed$).tw. 1729 
44 or/34-43 601172 
45 and/5,15,33,44 115 
 
 
CINAHL - Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health Literature 1982 to October Week 2 2008  
 
JAUN_phototherapy_cinahl_131008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 exp CLINICAL TRIALS/ 66624 
2 clinical trial.pt. 35279 
3 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 16386 
4 SINGLE-BLIND STUDIES/ 3168 
5 DOUBLE-BLIND STUDIES/ 12147 
6 TRIPLE-BLIND STUDIES/ 40 
7 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 9029 
8 RANDOM ASSIGNMENT/ 19554 
9 random$.tw. 58620 
10 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 51717 
11 randomi?ed control$ trial$.tw. 12888 
12 PLACEBOS/ 4737 
13 placebo$.tw. 12335 
14 or/1-13 107525 
15 META ANALYSIS/ 7066 
16 ((meta adj analy$) or metaanalys$ or meta-analy$).tw. 5613 
17 SYSTEMATIC REVIEW/ 4025 
18 systematic review.pt. 12734 
19 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw. 10107 
20 LITERATURE REVIEW/ 2606 
21 or/15-20 23859 
22 ("review" or "review studies" or "review academic" or "review tutorial").ti,ab,sh,pt.  118973 
23 (medline or medlars or embase or cochrane or scisearch or psycinfo or psychinfo or 
psychlit or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation").tw. 10394 
24 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 1132 
25 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 1978 

Neonatal jaundice 
386 
database$).tw. 
26 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw. 2938 
27 (peto or dersimonian or "der simonian" or fixed effect).tw. 450 
28 or/23-27 13738 
29 and/22,28 8053 
30 or/14,21,29 122343 
31 letter.pt. 66262 
32 commentary.pt. 87950 
33 editorial.pt. 93450 
34 or/31-33 199889 
35 30 not 34 108809 
36 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 6269 
37 preterm$.tw. 5354 
38 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 39183 
39 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 9909 
40 or/36-39 44090 
41 Phototherapy/ 673 
42 Light/tu [Therapeutic use] 50 
43 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 168 
44 (photoradiati$ adj3 therap$).tw. 2 
45 bilibed$.tw. 0 
46 biliblanket$.tw. 5 
47 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 3 
48 (optic adj2 fibre).tw. 32 
49 light.tw. 9109 
50 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
51 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
52 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
53 medestime.tw. 0 
54 neoblue$.tw. 1 
55 light emitting diode$.tw. 50 
56 (LED and light).tw. 182 
57 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 97 
58 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 23 
59 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 248 
60 ohmeda.tw. 35 
61 medela.tw. 1 
62 or/41-61 9911 
63 and/35,40,62 59 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_cinahl_131008 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
387 
 
Tuesday, July 21, 2009 7:46:53 AM  
#  Query  Limiters/ 
Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S31  S30 and S5  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S30  
S29 or S28 or S27 or S26 or S25 or 
S24 or S23 or S22 or S21 or S16 or 
S15 or S14 or S13 or S12 or S11 or 
S9 or S8 or S7 or S6  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S29  (TI "medela") or (AB "medela")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S28  (TI "ohmeda") or (AB "ohmeda")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S27  (TI "sunlight" or "heliotherap*") or 
(AB "sunlight" or "heliotherap*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S26  (TI "halogen" N3 "light*") or (AB 
"halogen" N3 "light*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S25  (TI "fluorescen*" N3 "light") or (AB 
"fluorescen*" N3 "light")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S24  (AB "LED" and "light")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S23  (TI "LED" and "light")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
388 
with Full Text  
S22  (TI "light emitting diode*") or (AB 
"light emitting diode*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S21  (TI "neoblue*") or (AB "neoblue*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S20  (TI "medestime") or (AB 
"medestime")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S19  (TI "draeger" N2 "phototherap*") or 
(AB "draeger" N2 "phototherap*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S18  (TI "hillrom microlite") or (AB 
"hillrom microlite")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S17  (TI "hillrom" N2 "microlite") or (AB 
"hillrom" N2 "microlite")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S16  (TI "light") or (AB "light")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S15  (AB "optic" N2 "fibre*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S14  TI ("optic" N2 "fibre*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S13  (AB "wallaby" or "wallabies")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
389 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S12  (TI "wallaby" or "wallabies")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S11  (TI "biliblanket*") or (AB 
"biliblanket*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S10  (TI "bilibed*") or (AB "bilibed*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S9  (TI "photoradiati*" N3 "therap*") or 
(AB "photoradiati*" N3 "therap*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S8  (TI light N3 therap*) or (AB light 
N3 therap*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S7  MH "LIGHT/tu"  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S6  MH PHOTOTHERAPY  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S4  (TI "newborn*" or "neonate*") or 
(AB "newborn*" or "neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
390 
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB "preterm*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S1  MH INFANT, PREMATURE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display 
 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
391 
Question: How effective is phototherapy? Economic evaluation 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to October Week 1 2008 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_economic_medline_141008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 77859 
2 cost effective$.tw. 44745 
3 economic.tw. 67051 
4 or/1-3 164703 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 492 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 2055 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 164469 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 33074 
9 preterm$.tw. 29486 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 426267 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 139364 
12 or/8-11 484217 
13 exp PHOTOTHERAPY/ 20273 
14 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL/th [Therapy] 1470 
15 LIGHT/th [Therapy] 7 
16 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 1488 
17 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw. 176 
18 bilibed.tw. 7 
19 biliblanket$.tw. 12 
20 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 918 
21 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 1075 
22 light.ti. 55786 
23 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
24 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
25 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
26 medestime.tw. 0 
27 neoblue$.tw. 2 
28 light emitting diode$.tw. 1280 
29 (LED and light).tw. 5808 
30 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 3557 
31 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 342 
32 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 5119 
33 ohmeda.tw. 382 
34 medela.tw. 12 
35 or/13-34 89832 
36 and/7,12,35 25 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
392 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 3rd Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_economic_cctr_141008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 5410 
2 cost effective$.tw. 4135 
3 economic.tw. 2275 
4 or/1-3 8908 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 38 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 178 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 8898 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1709 
9 preterm$.tw. 3074 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8435 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4189 
12 or/8-11 11391 
13 exp PHOTOTHERAPY/ 1159 
14 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL/th [Therapy] 94 
15 LIGHT/th [Therapy] 0 
16 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 273 
17 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw. 0 
18 bilibed.tw. 1 
19 biliblanket$.tw. 8 
20 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 5 
21 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 44 
22 light.ti. 1135 
23 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
24 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
25 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
26 medestime.tw. 0 
27 neoblue$.tw. 0 
28 light emitting diode$.tw. 50 
29 (LED and light).tw. 127 
30 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 80 
31 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 30 
32 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 129 
33 ohmeda.tw. 58 
34 medela.tw. 2 
35 or/13-34 2445 
36 and/7,12,35 2 
 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
393 
EBM Reviews - Health Technology Assessment 4th Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_economic_hta_141008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 1172 
2 cost effective$.tw. 940 
3 economic.tw. 698 
4 or/1-3 1688 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 0 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 0 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 1688 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 9 
9 preterm$.tw. 24 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 66 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 102 
12 or/8-11 125 
13 exp PHOTOTHERAPY/ 72 
14 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL/th [Therapy] 0 
15 LIGHT/th [Therapy] 0 
16 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 12 
17 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw. 0 
18 bilibed.tw. 0 
19 biliblanket$.tw. 0 
20 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 0 
21 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 0 
22 light.ti. 11 
23 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
24 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
25 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
26 medestime.tw. 0 
27 neoblue$.tw. 0 
28 light emitting diode$.tw. 0 
29 (LED and light).tw. 0 
30 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 0 
31 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 0 
32 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 2 
33 ohmeda.tw. 0 
34 medela.tw. 0 
35 or/13-34 79 
36 and/7,12,35 0 
 
 
EBM Reviews - NHS Economic Evaluation Database 3rd Quarter 2008 

Neonatal jaundice 
394 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_economic_nhseed_141008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 17348 
2 cost effective$.tw. 8488 
3 economic.tw. 23373 
4 or/1-3 23646 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 0 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 0 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 23646 
8 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 77 
9 preterm$.tw. 79 
10 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 861 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 925 
12 or/8-11 948 
13 exp PHOTOTHERAPY/ 38 
14 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL/th [Therapy] 0 
15 LIGHT/th [Therapy] 0 
16 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 0 
17 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw. 0 
18 bilibed.tw. 0 
19 biliblanket$.tw. 0 
20 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 0 
21 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 8 
22 light.ti. 8 
23 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
24 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
25 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
26 medestime.tw. 0 
27 neoblue$.tw. 0 
28 light emitting diode$.tw. 0 
29 (LED and light).tw. 15 
30 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 1 
31 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 0 
32 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 6 
33 ohmeda.tw. 0 
34 medela.tw. 0 
35 or/13-34 74 
36 and/7,12,35 2 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 41 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
395 
JAUN_phototherapy_economic_embase_141008 
 
# Searches Results 
1 costs.tw. 64077 
2 cost effective$.tw. 40727 
3 economic.tw. 53047 
4 or/1-3 133824 
5 (metabolic adj cost).tw. 378 
6 ((energy or oxygen) adj cost).tw. 1676 
7 4 not (5 or 6) 133650 
8 PREMATURITY/ 28948 
9 preterm$.tw. 26247 
10 NEWBORN/ 177181 
11 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 96416 
12 or/8-11 237226 
13 exp Phototherapy/ 23625 
14 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 1258 
15 (photoradiati$ adj3 therap$).tw. 129 
16 bilibed$.tw. 3 
17 biliblanket$.tw. 11 
18 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 635 
19 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 902 
20 exp Light/ 52208 
21 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
22 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
23 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
24 medestime.tw. 0 
25 neoblue$.tw. 1 
26 light emitting diode$.tw. 1150 
27 (LED and light).tw. 4841 
28 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 2577 
29 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 93 
30 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 4612 
31 ohmeda.tw. 410 
32 medela.tw. 4 
33 or/13-32 84117 
34 and/7,12,33 17 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
396 
Question: What is the correct procedure of giving phototherapy? Focus on the methods of feeding, 
types of feeding, maternal-infant bonding etc. Question 6.4. 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to November Week 2 2008 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_outcomes_Q6p4_medline_201108 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 33276 
2 preterm$.tw. 29760 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 428448 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 140387 
5 or/1-4 486947 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3447 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 184 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2213 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 2 89 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 10168 
12 jaundice$.ti. 9929 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 904 
14 kernicter$.tw. 691 
15 or/6-14 20919 
16 exp PHOTOTHERAPY/ 20437 
17 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL/th [Therapy] 1472 
18 LIGHT/th [Therapy] 8 
19 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 1497 
20 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw. 177 
21 bilibed.tw. 7 
22 biliblanket$.tw. 12 
23 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 936 
24 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 1080 
25 light.ti. 56299 
26 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
27 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
28 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
29 medestime.tw. 0 
30 neoblue$.tw. 2 
31 light emitting diode$.tw. 1300 
32 (LED and light).tw. 5872 
33 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 3594 
34 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 348 
35 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 5169 
36 ohmeda.tw. 384 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
397 
37 medela.tw. 13 
38 or/16-37 90649 
39 OBJECT ATTACHMENT/ or MOTHER-CHILD RELATIONS/ 19598 
40 bond$.tw. 104651 
41 (concern$ or worry or worries).tw. 261312 
42 ANXIETY/ 37869 
43 (satisfaction or satisf$).tw. 138678 
44 BOTTLE FEEDING/ or BREAST FEEDING/ 21543 
45 feed$.tw. 180003 
46 ENTERAL NUTRITION/ or exp PARENTERAL NUTRITION/ 29385 
47 ((continu$ or intermitt$) adj3 feed$).tw. 2212 
48 or/39-47 749138 
49 and/5,15,38,48 150 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 4th Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_outcomes_Q6p4_cctr_201108 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1731 
2 preterm$.tw. 3132 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8524 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4271 
5 or/1-4 11554 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 10 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 51 
12 jaundice$.ti. 196 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
14 kernicter$.tw. 7 
15 or/6-14 443 
16 exp PHOTOTHERAPY/ 1173 
17 JAUNDICE, NEONATAL/th [Therapy] 94 
18 LIGHT/th [Therapy] 0 
19 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 278 
20 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw. 0 
21 bilibed.tw. 1 
22 biliblanket$.tw. 8 
23 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 5 
24 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 43 

Neonatal jaundice 
398 
25 light.ti. 1148 
26 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
27 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
28 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
29 medestime.tw. 0 
30 neoblue$.tw. 0 
31 light emitting diode$.tw. 52 
32 (LED and light).tw. 131 
33 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 82 
34 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 31 
35 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 132 
36 ohmeda.tw. 58 
37 medela.tw. 2 
38 or/16-37 2478 
39 OBJECT ATTACHMENT/ or MOTHER-CHILD RELATIONS/ 391 
40 bond$.tw. 1299 
41 (concern$ or worry or worries).tw. 8669 
42 ANXIETY/ 3210 
43 (satisfaction or satisf$).tw. 10962 
44 BOTTLE FEEDING/ or BREAST FEEDING/ 850 
45 feed$.tw. 6812 
46 ENTERAL NUTRITION/ or exp PARENTERAL NUTRITION/ 1981 
47 ((continu$ or intermitt$) adj3 feed$).tw. 220 
48 or/39-47 31506 
49 and/5,15,38,48 12 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_outcomes_Q6p4_cdsrdare_201108 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 215 
2 preterm$.tw,tx. 567 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 612 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw,tx. 975 
5 or/1-4 1127 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw,tx. 5 
11 JAUNDICE.kw. 13 
12 jaundice$.ti. 10 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
399 
13 KERNICTERUS.kw. 1 
14 kernicter$.tw,tx. 14 
15 or/6-14 23 
16 PHOTOTHERAPY.kw. 21 
17 LIGHT.kw. 11 
18 (light adj3 therap$).tw,tx. 52 
19 (photoradiation adj3 therap$).tw,tx. 0 
20 bilibed.tw,tx. 0 
21 biliblanket$.tw,tx. 1 
22 (wallaby or wallabies).tw,tx. 1 
23 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw,tx. 12 
24 light.ti. 15 
25 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw,tx. 0 
26 hill rom microlite.tw,tx. 0 
27 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw,tx. 0 
28 medestime.tw,tx. 0 
29 neoblue$.tw,tx. 0 
30 light emitting diode$.tw,tx. 2 
31 (LED and light).tw. 250 
32 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw,tx. 5 
33 (halogen adj3 light$).tw,tx. 1 
34 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw,tx. 30 
35 ohmeda.tw,tx. 2 
36 medela.tw,tx. 0 
37 or/16-36 348 
38 (OBJECT ATTACHMENT or MOTHER-CHILD RELATIONS).kw. 20 
39 bond$.tw,tx. 156 
40 (concern$ or worry or worries).tw,tx. 3076 
41 ANXIETY.kw. 192 
42 (satisfaction or satisf$).tw,tx. 2376 
43 (BOTTLE FEEDING or BREAST FEEDING).kw. 33 
44 feed$.tw,tx. 1244 
45 (ENTERAL NUTRITION or PARENTERAL NUTRITION).kw. 95 
46 ((continu$ or intermitt$) adj3 feed$).tw,tx. 39 
47 or/38-46 5034 
48 and/5,15,37,47 2 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 47 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_outcomes_Q6p4_embase_201108 
 
# Searches Results 
1 PREMATURITY/ 29115 

Neonatal jaundice 
400 
2 preterm$.tw. 26455 
3 NEWBORN/ 177875 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 96908 
5 or/1-4 238370 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5678 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1055 
8 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 15 
9 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 247 
10 JAUNDICE/ 9769 
11 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1734 
12 jaundice$.ti. 3639 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 709 
14 kernicterus$.ti. 149 
15 or/6-14 18063 
16 exp Phototherapy/ 23879 
17 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 1267 
18 bilibed$.tw. 3 
19 biliblanket$.tw. 11 
20 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 638 
21 (optic adj2 fibre$).tw. 905 
22 exp Light/ 52569 
23 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
24 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
25 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
26 medestime.tw. 0 
27 neoblue$.tw. 1 
28 light emitting diode$.tw. 1162 
29 (LED and light).tw. 4873 
30 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 2590 
31 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 94 
32 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 4646 
33 or/16-32 84324 
34 mother child relation/ 6677 
35 object relation/ 2477 
36 (bonding or bond$).tw. 88939 
37 (concern$ or worry or worries).tw. 212699 
38 Anxiety/ 46734 
39 (satisfaction or satisf$).tw. 114247 
40 bottle feeding/ or breast feeding/ 14436 
41 feed$.tw. 126456 
42 enteric feeding/ or exp parenteral nutrition/ 23218 
43 ((continu$ or intermitt$) adj3 feed$).tw. 1731 
44 or/34-43 601976 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
401 
45 and/5,15,33,44 115 
 
 
CINAHL - Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health Literature 1982 to November Week 2 
2008 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_outcomes_Q6p4_cinahl_201108 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 6307 
2 preterm$.tw. 5404 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 39507 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 10009 
5 or/1-4 44471 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 219 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 143 
8 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 1 
9 ( (bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 27 
10 JAUNDICE/ 223 
11 jaundice$.ti. 304 
12 Kernicterus/ 102 
13 kernicterus$.ti. 41 
14 or/6-13 735 
15 Phototherapy/ 690 
16 Light/tu [Therapeutic use] 50 
17 (light adj3 therap$).tw. 169 
18 (photoradiati$ adj3 therap$).tw. 2 
19 bilibed$.tw. 0 
20 biliblanket$.tw. 5 
21 (wallaby or wallabies).tw. 3 
22 (optic adj2 fibre).tw. 32 
23 light.tw. 9220 
24 (hill?rom adj microlite).tw. 0 
25 hill rom microlite.tw. 0 
26 (Draeger adj2 phototherap$).tw. 0 
27 medestime.tw. 0 
28 neoblue$.tw. 1 
29 light emitting diode$.tw. 50 
30 (LED and light).tw. 185 
31 (fluorescen$ adj3 light$).tw. 98 
32 (halogen adj3 light$).tw. 24 
33 (sunlight or heliotherap$).tw. 252 
34 ohmeda.tw. 35 
35 medela.tw. 1 

Neonatal jaundice 
402 
36 or/15-35 10041 
37 Mother-Child Relations/ 1943 
38 bond$.tw. 1972 
39 (concern$ or worry or worries).tw. 42736 
40 anxiety/ or separation anxiety/ 7970 
41 (satisfaction or satisf$).tw. 25117 
42 bottle feeding/ or breast feeding/ 7865 
43 feed$.tw. 13855 
44 enteral nutrition/ or exp parenteral nutrition/ 4930 
45 ((continu$ or intermitt$) adj3 feed$).tw. 252 
46 or/37-45 96923 
47 and/5,14,36,46 32 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_phototherapy_outcomes_Q6p4_cinahl_201108 
 
Friday, November 21, 2008 9:44:46 AM  
#  Query  Limiters 
/Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S31  S30 and S5  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S30  
S29 or S28 or S27 or S26 or 
S25 or S24 or S23 or S22 or 
S21 or S16 or S15 or S14 or 
S13 or S12 or S11 or S9 or 
S8 or S7 or S6  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S29  (TI "medela") or (AB 
"medela")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S28  (TI "ohmeda") or (AB 
"ohmeda")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S27  
(TI "sunlight" or 
"heliotherap*") or (AB 
"sunlight" or "heliotherap*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
403 
S26  (TI "halogen" N3 "light*") or 
(AB "halogen" N3 "light*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S25  
(TI "fluorescen*" N3 "light") 
or (AB "fluorescen*" N3 
"light")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S24  (AB "LED" and "light")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S23  (TI "LED" and "light")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S22  
(TI "light emitting diode*") 
or (AB "light emitting 
diode*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S21  (TI "neoblue*") or (AB 
"neoblue*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S20  (TI "medestime") or (AB 
"medestime")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S19  
(TI "draeger" N2 
"phototherap*") or (AB 
"draeger" N2 
"phototherap*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S18  (TI "hillrom microlite") or 
(AB "hillrom microlite")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S17  
(TI "hillrom" N2 "microlite") 
or (AB "hillrom" N2 
"microlite")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
404 
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S16  (TI "light") or (AB "light")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S15  (AB "optic" N2 "fibre*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S14  TI ("optic" N2 "fibre*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S13  (AB "wallaby" or 
"wallabies")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S12  (TI "wallaby" or "wallabies")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S11  (TI "biliblanket*") or (AB 
"biliblanket*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S10  (TI "bilibed*") or (AB 
"bilibed*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S9  
(TI "photoradiati*" N3 
"therap*") or (AB 
"photoradiati*" N3 
"therap*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S8  (TI light N3 therap*) or (AB 
light N3 therap*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S7  MH "LIGHT/tu"  Search modes - Interface - EBSCOhost  Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
405 
Boolean/Phrase  Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S6  MH PHOTOTHERAPY  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S4  
(TI "newborn*" or 
"neonate*") or (AB 
"newborn*" or "neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB 
"preterm*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S1  MH INFANT, PREMATURE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
406 
Question: Is it beneficial to give additional fluids during treatment with phototherapy?  
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to November Week 3 2008 
 
JAUN_fluids2_phototherapy_Q7_medline_081208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 33330 
2 preterm$.tw. 29802 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 428896 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 140553 
5 or/1-4 487500 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3451 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 185 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2214 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 290 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 10190 
12 jaundice$.ti. 9946 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 905 
14 kernicterus.tw. 677 
15 or/6-14 20953 
16 BOTTLE FEEDING/ or ENTERAL NUTRITION/ or exp PARENTERAL NUTRITION/  32183 
17 BREAST FEEDING/ 20577 
18 feed$.tw. 180353 
19 FOOD/ 18857 
20 food$.tw. 176438 
21 ((enteral$ or parenteral$ or intravenous$) adj3 (feed$ or food$ or fluid$ or 
nutrition$)).tw. 23560 
22 fluid$.tw. 259556 
23 nutritio$.tw. 122433 
24 exp GLUCOSE/ 198583 
25 dextrose.tw. 6037 
26 LACTOSE/ 8485 
27 exp ELECTROLYTES/ 368474 
28 exp AMINO ACIDS/ 609666 
29 exp FATS/ 66675 
30 exp FATTY ACIDS/ 300482 
31 fatty.tw. 124979 
32 exp INFANT FOOD/ 9643 
33 (formula$ or supplement$).tw. 251163 
34 CASEINS/ 11762 
35 casein hydrolysate.tw. 549 
36 rehydrat$.tw. 4978 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
407 
37 CALCIUM/ 214816 
38 CALCIUM, DIETARY/ 7543 
39 exp VITAMINS/ 220605 
40 MILK/ or MILK, HUMAN/ 47660 
41 exp ASPARTIC ACID/ 25352 
42 aspartic$.tw. 12138 
43 exp OROTIC ACID/ 3149 
44 or/16-43 2515888 
45 and/5,15,44 852 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 4th Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_fluids2_phototherapy_Q7_cctr_081208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1731 
2 preterm$.tw. 3132 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8524 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4271 
5 or/1-4 11554 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 10 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 51 
12 jaundice$.ti. 196 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
14 kernicterus.tw. 7 
15 or/6-14 443 
16 BOTTLE FEEDING/ or ENTERAL NUTRITION/ or exp PARENTERAL NUTRITION/  2111 
17 BREAST FEEDING/ 787 
18 feed$.tw. 6812 
19 FOOD/ 839 
20 food$.tw. 7227 
21 ((enteral$ or parenteral$ or intravenous$) adj3 (feed$ or food$ or fluid$ or nutrition$)).tw.  3688 
22 fluid$.tw. 7847 
23 nutritio$.tw. 7413 
24 exp GLUCOSE/ 9098 
25 dextrose.tw. 805 
26 LACTOSE/ 221 
27 exp ELECTROLYTES/ 4961 
28 exp AMINO ACIDS/ 11618 

Neonatal jaundice 
408 
29 exp FATS/ 4051 
30 exp FATTY ACIDS/ 11708 
31 fatty.tw. 5015 
32 exp INFANT FOOD/ 892 
33 (formula$ or supplement$).tw. 26606 
34 CASEINS/ 166 
35 casein hydrolysate.tw. 54 
36 rehydrat$.tw. 596 
37 CALCIUM/ 2282 
38 CALCIUM, DIETARY/ 492 
39 exp VITAMINS/ 8044 
40 MILK/ or MILK, HUMAN/ 1142 
41 exp ASPARTIC ACID/ 202 
42 aspartic$.tw. 71 
43 exp OROTIC ACID/ 19 
44 or/16-43 83981 
45 and/5,15,44 41 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_fluids2_phototherapy_Q7_cdsrdare_081208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 212 
2 preterm$.tw,tx. 574 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 613 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw,tx. 996 
5 or/1-4 1149 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw,tx. 5 
11 JAUNDICE.kw. 14 
12 jaundice$.ti. 10 
13 KERNICTERUS.kw. 1 
14 kernicterus.tw,tx. 14 
15 or/6-14 23 
16 (BOTTLE FEEDING or ENTERAL NUTRITION or PARENTERAL NUTRITION).kw.  95 
17 BREAST FEEDING.kw. 31 
18 feed$.tw,tx. 1286 
19 FOOD.kw. 95 
20 food$.tw,tx. 871 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
409 
21 ((enteral$ or parenteral$ or intravenous$) adj3 (feed$ or food$ or fluid$ or 
nutrition$)).tw,tx. 340 
22 fluid$.tw,tx. 1079 
23 nutritio$.tw,tx. 966 
24 GLUCOSE.kw. 101 
25 dextrose.tw,tx. 68 
26 LACTOSE.kw. 4 
27 ELECTROLYTES.kw. 1 
28 AMINO ACIDS.kw. 18 
29 FATS.kw. 22 
30 FATTY ACIDS.kw. 53 
31 fatty.tw,tx. 247 
32 INFANT FOOD.kw. 14 
33 (formula$ or supplement$).tw,tx. 2751 
34 CASEINS.kw. 1 
35 casein hydrolysate.tw,tx. 4 
36 rehydrat$.tw,tx. 67 
37 CALCIUM.kw. 139 
38 CALCIUM, DIETARY.kw. 24 
39 VITAMINS.kw. 58 
40 (MILK or MILK, HUMAN).kw. 33 
41 ASPARTIC ACID.kw. 1 
42 aspartic$.tw,tx. 8 
43 OROTIC ACID.kw. 0 
44 or/16-43 4816 
45 and/5,15,44 10 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 49 
 
JAUN_fluids2_phototherapy_Q7_embase_101208 
 
 
# Searches Results 
1 PREMATURITY/ 29195 
2 preterm$.tw. 26540 
3 NEWBORN/ 178121 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 97095 
5 or/1-4 238783 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5702 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 1737 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1057 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 16 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 248 

Neonatal jaundice 
410 
11 JAUNDICE/ 9796 
12 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1737 
13 jaundice$.ti. 3642 
14 KERNICTERUS/ 710 
15 kernicterus$.ti. 150 
16 or/6-15 18115 
17 Feeding/ or Infant Feeding/ or Breast Feeding/ or Bottle Feeding/ or Intravenous Feeding/ 
or Enteric Feeding/ 34673 
18 Parenteral Nutrition/ 10281 
19 feed$.tw. 126749 
20 ((enteral$ or parenteral$ or intravenous$) adj3 (feed$ or food$ or fluid$ or 
nutrition$)).tw. 19593 
21 food/ or exp baby food/ or exp infant nutrition/ 37365 
22 food.tw. 118597 
23 nutritio$.tw. 88341 
24 liquid/ 11439 
25 fluid$.tw. 204075 
26 Glucose/ 112445 
27 dextrose.tw. 4974 
28 Lactose/ 7837 
29 Electrolyte/ 10764 
30 exp Amino Acid/ 546350 
31 Fat/ 9195 
32 exp Fatty Acid/ 228119 
33 fatty.tw. 94352 
34 (formula$ or supplement$).tw. 213906 
35 Casein/ 5248 
36 casein hydrolysate.tw. 294 
37 rehydrat$.tw. 3774 
38 Calcium Intake/ or Calcium/ 103005 
39 exp Vitamin/ 227676 
40 Milk/ 13462 
41 Aspartic Acid/ 15849 
42 aspartic$.tw. 9533 
43 Orotic Acid/ 755 
44 or/17-43 1731767 
45 and/5,16,44 853 
 
 
CINAHL - Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health Literature 1982 to December Week 1 2008 
 
JAUN_fluids2_phototherapy_Q7_cinahl_101208 
 
# Searches Results 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
411 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 6325 
2 preterm$.tw. 5427 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 39649 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 10060 
5 or/1-4 44637 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 221 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 144 
8 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 28 
9 JAUNDICE/ 225 
10 jaundice$.ti. 304 
11 KERNICTERUS/ 103 
12 kernicterus$.ti. 42 
13 or/6-12 739 
14 BOTTLE FEEDING/ or exp BREAST FEEDING/ or "ENTERAL FEEDING (SABA CCC)"/  7967 
15 exp Parenteral Nutrition/ 2257 
16 feed$.tw. 13941 
17 ((enteral$ or parenteral$ or intravenous$) adj3 (feed$ or food$ or fluid$ or 
nutrition$)).tw. 3458 
18 food/ or milk, human/ 5097 
19 food$.tw. 18854 
20 Infant Nutrition/ 1511 
21 nutritio$.tw. 25614 
22 fluid$.tw. 8959 
23 GLUCOSE/ 1797 
24 dextrose.tw. 307 
25 Lactose/ 101 
26 exp Electrolytes/ 3369 
27 exp Amino Acids/ 6582 
28 FATS/ 382 
29 exp Fatty Acids/ 7657 
30 fatty.tw. 3503 
31 exp Infant Food/ 1527 
32 Infant Feeding/ 1583 
33 (formula$ or supplement$).tw. 23587 
34 Caseins/ 34 
35 casein hydrolysate.tw. 11 
36 rehydrat$.tw. 378 
37 CALCIUM, DIETARY/ or CALCIUM/ 4494 
38 exp Vitamins/ 12761 
39 Milk/ 1083 
40 Aspartic Acid/ 100 
41 aspartic$.tw. 45 
42 orotic.tw. 4 

Neonatal jaundice 
412 
43 or/6-42 111537 
44 and/5,13,43 446 
45 from 44 keep 1-446 446 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_fluids2_phototherapy_Q7_cinahl_101208 
 
 
Tuesday, July 21, 2009 9:01:13 AM  
#  Query  Limiters/ 
Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S63  S5 and S17 and S62  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S62  
S18 or S19 or S20 or S21 or 
S22 or S23 or S24 or S25 or 
S26 or S27 or S28 or S29 or 
S30 or S31 or S32 or S33 or 
S34 or S35 or S36 or S37 or 
S38 or S39 or S40 or S41 or 
S42 or S43 or S44 or S45 or 
S46 or S47 or S48 or S49 or 
S50 or S51 or S52 or S53 or 
S54 or S55 or S56 or S57 or 
S58 or S59 or S60 or S61  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S61  TI (orotic*) or AB (orotic*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S60  TI (aspartic*) or AB 
(aspartic*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S59  MH ASPARTIC ACID  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S58  MH MILK  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
413 
S57  MH VITAMINS+  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S56  MH CALCIUM  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S55  MH CALCIUM, DIETARY  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S54  TI (rehydrat*) or AB 
(rehydrat*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S53  TI (casein hydrolysate) or AB 
(casein hydrolysate)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S52  MH CASEINS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S51  
TI (formula* or 
supplement*) or AB 
(formula* or supplement*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S50  MH INFANT FEEDING  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S49  MH INFANT FOOD+  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S48  TI (fatty) or AB (fatty)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
414 
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S47  MH FATTY ACIDS+  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S46  MH FATS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S45  MH AMINO ACIDS+  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S44  MH ELECTROLYTES+  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S43  MH LACTOSE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S42  TI (dextrose) or AB 
(dextrose)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S41  MH GLUCOSE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S40  TI (fluid*) or AB ((fluid*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S39  TI (nutritio*) or AB 
(nutritio*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S38  MH INFANT NUTRITION  Search modes - Interface - EBSCOhost  Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
415 
Boolean/Phrase  Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S37  TI (food*) or AB (food*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S36  MH MILK, HUMAN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S35  MH FOOD  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S34  
TI (intravenous N3 
nutirtion*) or AB 
(intravenous N3 nutrition*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S33  TI (intravenous N3 fluid*) or 
AB (intravenous N3 fluid*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S32  TI (intravenous N3 food*) or 
AB (intravenous N3 food*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S31  TI (intravenous N3 feed*) or 
AB (intravenous N3 feed*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S30  
TI (parenteral N3 nutrition*) 
or AB (parenteral N3 
nutrition*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S29  TI (parenteral N3 fluid*) or 
AB (parenteral N3 fluid*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
416 
Full Text  
S28  TI (parenteral N3 food*) or 
AB (parenteral N3 food*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S27  TI (parenteral N3 feed*) or 
AB (parenteral N3 feed*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S26  TI (enteral N3 nutrition*) or 
AB (enteral N3 nutrition*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S25  TI (enteral N3 fluid*) or AB 
(enteral N3 fluid*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S24  TI (enteral N3 food*) or AB 
(enteral N3 food*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S23  TI (enteral N3 feed*) or AB 
(enteral N3 feed*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S22  TI (feed* ) or AB (feed* )  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S21  MH PARENTERAL 
NUTRITION+  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S20  (MH "ENTERAL FEEDING 
(Saba CCC)")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S19  MH BREAST FEEDING+  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
417 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S18  MH BOTTLE FEEDING  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S17  
S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or S10 
or S11 or S12 or S13 or S14 
or S15 or S16  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S16  (TI "kernicterus*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S15  MH KERNICTERUS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S14  (TI jaundice*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S12  (AB "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S11  (TI "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S10  (AB "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
418 
S9  (TI "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S8  (TI "bilirubinaemia" OR 
"bilirubinemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S7  (TI "hyperbilirubinemia" or 
"hyperbilirubinaemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S6  MH HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S4  
(TI "newborn*" or 
"neonate*") or (AB 
"newborn*" or "neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB 
"preterm*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S1  MH INFANT, PREMATURE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
419 
Question: How effective is exchange transfusion? Question 8 (restricted to Srs and RCTs)  
 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to November Week 3 2008 
 
JAUN_extransfusion_Q8_medline_011208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 269354 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 80768 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD/ 101524 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD/ 12756 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 63696 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 58451 
7 or/1-6 454611 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 99216 
9 clinical trial.pt. 460950 
10 exp CLINICAL TRIAL/ 572520 
11 exp CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC/ 215006 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 135409 
13 PLACEBOS/ 28379 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 128819 
15 random$.tw,sh. 572739 
16 or/8-15 1004679 
17 or/7,16 1009351 
18 META ANALYSIS/ 20239 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC/ 8893 
20 meta analysis.pt. 20239 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 35744 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 19180 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 1992 
24 or/18-23 50031 
25 review$.pt. 1443690 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or 
psychlit or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw.  32625 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 3596 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 5571 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 30488 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 1438 
31 or/26-30 65157 
32 and/25,31 27889 
33 or/24,32 66224 
34 letter.pt. 654631 

Neonatal jaundice 
420 
35 case report.tw. 140535 
36 comment.pt. 376053 
37 editorial.pt. 234808 
38 historical article.pt. 258810 
39 or/34-38 1331074 
40 17 not 39 971945 
41 33 not 39 62537 
42 or/40-41 1003830 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 33294 
44 preterm$.tw. 29795 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 428760 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 140513 
47 or/43-46 487320 
48 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3449 
49 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 185 
50 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2214 
51 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
52 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 290 
53 exp JAUNDICE/ 10170 
54 jaundice$.ti. 9930 
55 KERNICTERUS/ 904 
56 kernicterus.tw. 676 
57 or/48-56 20922 
58 EXCHANGE TRANSFUSION, WHOLE BLOOD/ 4060 
59 (exchange adj3 transfusion$).tw. 3519 
60 or/58-59 5649 
61 and/42,47,57,60 63 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 4th Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_extransfusion_Q8_cctr_011208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 249900 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 75697 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD/ 82027 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD/ 7788 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 20222 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 0 
7 or/1-6 320983 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 107843 
9 clinical trial.pt. 273573 
10 exp CLINICAL TRIAL/ 0 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
421 
11 exp CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC/ 0 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 35968 
13 PLACEBOS/ 18338 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 106765 
15 random$.tw,sh. 246271 
16 or/8-15 391449 
17 or/7,16 403240 
18 META ANALYSIS/ 0 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC/ 172 
20 meta analysis.pt. 478 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 1068 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 265 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 26 
24 or/18-23 1478 
25 review$.pt. 2652 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or psychlit 
or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw. 412 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 40 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 62 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 2075 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 31 
31 or/26-30 2530 
32 and/25,31 92 
33 or/24,32 1540 
34 letter.pt. 4515 
35 case report.tw. 151 
36 comment.pt. 1577 
37 editorial.pt. 280 
38 historical article.pt. 58 
39 or/34-38 5302 
40 17 not 39 398088 
41 33 not 39 1506 
42 or/40-41 398345 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1731 
44 preterm$.tw. 3132 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8524 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4271 
47 or/43-46 11554 
48 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
49 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 10 
50 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
51 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 

Neonatal jaundice 
422 
52 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
53 exp JAUNDICE/ 51 
54 jaundice$.ti. 196 
55 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
56 kernicterus.tw. 7 
57 or/48-56 443 
58 EXCHANGE TRANSFUSION, WHOLE BLOOD/ 50 
59 (exchange adj3 transfusion$).tw. 103 
60 or/58-59 123 
61 and/42,47,57,60 42 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_extransfusion_Q8_cdsrdare_011208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 0 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 0 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD.kw. 233 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD.kw. 18 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION.kw. 11 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS.kw. 6081 
7 or/1-6 6124 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 3988 
9 clinical trial.pt. 0 
10 CLINICAL TRIAL.kw. 0 
11 CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC.kw. 826 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 6201 
13 PLACEBOS.kw. 112 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 5571 
15 random$.tw,sh. 11901 
16 or/8-15 12318 
17 or/7,16 12318 
18 META ANALYSIS.kw. 163 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC.kw. 93 
20 meta analysis.pt. 0 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 8308 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 8226 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 2923 
24 or/18-23 12169 
25 review$.pt. 0 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or psychlit 
or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw,tx. 11759 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
423 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw,tx. 1940 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 2655 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 6059 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 4041 
31 or/26-30 11940 
32 and/25,31 0 
33 or/24,32 12169 
34 letter.pt. 0 
35 case report.tw,tx. 122 
36 comment.pt. 0 
37 editorial.pt. 0 
38 historical article.pt. 0 
39 or/34-38 122 
40 17 not 39 12210 
41 33 not 39 12066 
42 or/40-41 13589 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 212 
44 preterm$.tw,tx. 574 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 613 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw,tx. 996 
47 or/43-46 1149 
48 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
49 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
50 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
51 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
52 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw,tx. 5 
53 JAUNDICE.kw. 14 
54 jaundice$.ti. 10 
55 KERNICTERUS.kw. 1 
56 kernicterus.tw,tx. 14 
57 or/48-56 23 
58 EXCHANGE TRANSFUSION, WHOLE BLOOD.kw. 6 
59 (exchange adj3 transfusion$).tw,tx. 33 
60 or/58-59 33 
61 and/42,47,57,60 12 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 48 
 
JAUN_extransfusion_Q8_embase_011208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 CLINICAL TRIALS/ 522052 

Neonatal jaundice 
424 
2 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).ti,ab,sh. 123547 
3 SINGLE BLIND PROCEDURE/ 7823 
4 DOUBLE BLIND PROCEDURE/ 70602 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 26321 
6 CROSSOVER PROCEDURE/ 20738 
7 PLACEBO/ 120388 
8 placebo$.ti,ab,sh. 171107 
9 random$.ti,ab,sh. 423840 
10 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 163207 
11 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj (blind$ or mask$)).ti,ab,sh. 91916 
12 randomi?ed control$ trial$.tw. 32220 
13 or/1-12 856359 
14 META ANALYSIS/ 34265 
15 ((meta adj analy$) or metaanalys$ or meta-analy$).ti,ab,sh. 43974 
16 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).ti,sh,ab. 26646 
17 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).ti,ab,sh. 1626 
18 or/14-17 60821 
19 review.pt. 907394 
20 (medline or medlars or embase).ab. 23179 
21 (scisearch or science citation index).ab. 718 
22 (psychlit or psyclit or psychinfo or psycinfo or cinahl or cochrane).ab.  8449 
23 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 2659 
24 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw. 4272 
25 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw. 24530 
26 (peto or dersimonian or "der simonian" or fixed effect).tw. 878 
27 or/20-26 52106 
28 and/19,27 18505 
29 or/18,28 71132 
30 (book or conference paper or editorial or letter or note or proceeding or short survey).pt.  1717302 
31 13 not 30 732458 
32 29 not 31 33276 
33 or/31-32 765734 
34 PREMATURITY/ 29136 
35 preterm$.tw. 26475 
36 NEWBORN/ 177971 
37 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 96976 
38 or/34-37 238514 
39 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5686 
40 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 1735 
41 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1055 
42 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 15 
43 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 247 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
425 
44 JAUNDICE/ 9776 
45 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1735 
46 jaundice$.ti. 3639 
47 KERNICTERUS/ 709 
48 kernicterus$.ti. 149 
49 or/39-48 18078 
50 EXCHANGE BLOOD TRANSFUSION/ 1714 
51 (exchange adj3 transfusion$).tw. 1856 
52 or/50-51 2540 
53 and/33,38,49,52 50 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_extrafusion_Q8_cinahl_011208 
 
#  Query  Limiters/ 
Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S21  S5 and S17 and S20  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S20  S18 or S19  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S19  
TI (exchange N3 
transfusion*) or AB 
(exchange N3 
transfusion*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S18  
MH EXCHANGE 
TRANSFUSION, WHOLE 
BLOOD  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S17  
S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or S10 
or S11 or S12 or S13 or 
S14 or S15 or S16  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S16  (TI "kernicterus*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
Display  

Neonatal jaundice 
426 
with Full Text  
S15  MH KERNICTERUS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S14  (TI jaundice*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S12  (AB "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S11  (TI "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S10  (AB "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S9  (TI "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S8  (TI "bilirubinaemia" OR 
"bilirubinemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S7  (TI "hyperbilirubinemia" or 
"hyperbilirubinaemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S6  MH 
HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
427 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S4  
(TI "newborn*" or 
"neonate*") or (AB 
"newborn*" or 
"neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB 
"preterm*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display  
S1  MH INFANT, 
PREMATURE  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL 
with Full Text  
Display 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
428 
QUESTION: What are the other ways of treating hyperbilirubinaemia? Question 9 (restricted to Srs 
and RCTs) 
 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to November Week 3 2008 
 
JAUN_other_treatments_hyperbil_medline_041208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 269477 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 80776 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD/ 101566 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD/ 12762 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 63710 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 58509 
7 or/1-6 454816 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 99256 
9 clinical trial.pt. 460981 
10 exp CLINICAL TRIAL/ 572702 
11 exp CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC/ 215116 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 135508 
13 PLACEBOS/ 28390 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 128873 
15 random$.tw,sh. 573052 
16 or/8-15 1005126 
17 or/7,16 1009800 
18 META ANALYSIS/ 20263 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC/ 8898 
20 meta analysis.pt. 20263 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 35783 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 19221 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 1997 
24 or/18-23 50110 
25 review$.pt. 1444767 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or 
psychlit or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw.  32669 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 3600 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 5576 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 30507 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 1441 
31 or/26-30 65217 
32 and/25,31 27917 
33 or/24,32 66312 
34 letter.pt. 654713 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
429 
35 case report.tw. 140604 
36 comment.pt. 376142 
37 editorial.pt. 234908 
38 historical article.pt. 258893 
39 or/34-38 1331435 
40 17 not 39 972374 
41 33 not 39 62622 
42 or/40-41 1004300 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 33330 
44 preterm$.tw. 29802 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 428896 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 140553 
47 or/43-46 487500 
48 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3451 
49 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 185 
50 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2214 
51 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
52 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 290 
53 exp JAUNDICE/ 10190 
54 jaundice$.ti. 9946 
55 KERNICTERUS/ 905 
56 kernicterus.tw. 677 
57 or/48-56 20953 
58 exp METALLOPORPHYRINS/ 27073 
59 exp PORPHYRINS/ 41919 
60 (metalloporphyrin$ or protoporphyrin$ or mesoprophytin$).tw. 6025 
61 PORPHOBILINOGEN/ 610 
62 exp "HEME OXYGENASE (DECYCLIZING)"/ 4467 
63 SnMP.tw. 87 
64 exp GAMMA-GLOBULINS/ 19547 
65 gammaglobulin$.tw. 1893 
66 "gamma globulin$".tw. 8903 
67 exp IMMUNOGLOBULINS/ 637134 
68 immun?globulin$.tw. 101621 
69 "immuno globulin$".tw. 109 
70 "immune globulin$".tw. 2583 
71 phenobarb$.tw. 16064 
72 PHENYTOIN/ 12136 
73 Phenytoin.tw. 8677 
74 CLOFIBRATE/ 3708 
75 CHOLESTYRAMINE/ 2484 
76 (cholestyramine$ or colestyramine$).tw. 2086 
77 AGAR/ 7242 

Neonatal jaundice 
430 
78 exp CHARCOAL/ 5272 
79 SUPPOSITORIES/ 3475 
80 exp COMPLEMENTARY THERAPIES/ 133872 
81 MEDICINE, HERBAL/ 808 
82 ((alternative or complementary or traditional or herbal or integrative) adj3 (therap$ or 
medicine$)).tw. 28175 
83 DRUGS, CHINESE HERBAL/ 16180 
84 "yin chin".tw. 3 
85 manna.tw. 33 
86 infusion$.tw. 171350 
87 exp PENICILLAMINE/ 7359 
88 "d-penicillamin$".tw. 2965 
89 DIAZEPAM/ 16365 
90 or/58-89 1104119 
91 and/42,47,57,90 74 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 4th Quarter 2008 
 
JAUN_other_treatments_hyperbil_cctr_041208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 249900 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 75697 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD/ 82027 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD/ 7788 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 20222 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 0 
7 or/1-6 320983 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 107843 
9 clinical trial.pt. 273573 
10 exp CLINICAL TRIAL/ 0 
11 exp CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC/ 0 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 35968 
13 PLACEBOS/ 18338 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 106765 
15 random$.tw,sh. 246271 
16 or/8-15 391449 
17 or/7,16 403240 
18 META ANALYSIS/ 0 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC/ 172 
20 meta analysis.pt. 478 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 1068 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 265 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
431 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 26 
24 or/18-23 1478 
25 review$.pt. 2652 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or psychlit 
or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw. 412 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 40 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 62 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 2075 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 31 
31 or/26-30 2530 
32 and/25,31 92 
33 or/24,32 1540 
34 letter.pt. 4515 
35 case report.tw. 151 
36 comment.pt. 1577 
37 editorial.pt. 280 
38 historical article.pt. 58 
39 or/34-38 5302 
40 17 not 39 398088 
41 33 not 39 1506 
42 or/40-41 398345 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1731 
44 preterm$.tw. 3132 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8524 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4271 
47 or/43-46 11554 
48 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
49 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 10 
50 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
51 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
52 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 9 
53 exp JAUNDICE/ 51 
54 jaundice$.ti. 196 
55 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
56 kernicterus.tw. 7 
57 or/48-56 443 
58 exp METALLOPORPHYRINS/ 58 
59 exp PORPHYRINS/ 204 
60 (metalloporphyrin$ or protoporphyrin$ or mesoprophytin$).tw. 101 
61 PORPHOBILINOGEN/ 3 
62 exp "HEME OXYGENASE (DECYCLIZING)"/ 14 
63 SnMP.tw. 4 

Neonatal jaundice 
432 
64 exp GAMMA-GLOBULINS/ 151 
65 gammaglobulin$.tw. 103 
66 "gamma globulin$".tw. 169 
67 exp IMMUNOGLOBULINS/ 9088 
68 immun?globulin$.tw. 2199 
69 "immuno globulin$".tw. 5 
70 "immune globulin$".tw. 280 
71 phenobarb$.tw. 505 
72 PHENYTOIN/ 451 
73 Phenytoin.tw. 624 
74 CLOFIBRATE/ 186 
75 CHOLESTYRAMINE/ 234 
76 (cholestyramine$ or colestyramine$).tw. 330 
77 AGAR/ 11 
78 exp CHARCOAL/ 189 
79 SUPPOSITORIES/ 470 
80 exp COMPLEMENTARY THERAPIES/ 7447 
81 MEDICINE, HERBAL/ 16 
82 ((alternative or complementary or traditional or herbal or integrative) adj3 (therap$ or 
medicine$)).tw. 2538 
83 DRUGS, CHINESE HERBAL/ 1353 
84 "yin chin".tw. 0 
85 manna.tw. 3 
86 infusion$.tw. 21954 
87 exp PENICILLAMINE/ 159 
88 "d-penicillamin$".tw. 172 
89 DIAZEPAM/ 1755 
90 or/58-89 45480 
91 and/42,47,57,90 58 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_other_treatments_hyperbil_cdsrdare_041208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 randomized controlled trial.pt. 0 
2 controlled clinical trial.pt. 0 
3 DOUBLE BLIND METHOD.kw. 233 
4 SINGLE BLIND METHOD.kw. 18 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION.kw. 11 
6 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS.kw. 6081 
7 or/1-6 6124 
8 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 3988 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
433 
9 clinical trial.pt. 0 
10 CLINICAL TRIAL.kw. 0 
11 CLINICAL TRIALS AS TOPIC.kw. 826 
12 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 6201 
13 PLACEBOS.kw. 112 
14 placebo$.tw,sh. 5571 
15 random$.tw,sh. 11901 
16 or/8-15 12318 
17 or/7,16 12318 
18 META ANALYSIS.kw. 163 
19 META ANALYSIS AS TOPIC.kw. 93 
20 meta analysis.pt. 0 
21 (metaanaly$ or meta-analy$ or (meta adj analy$)).tw,sh. 8308 
22 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 8226 
23 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw,sh. 2923 
24 or/18-23 12169 
25 review$.pt. 0 
26 (medline or medlars or embase or cinahl or cochrane or psycinfo or psychinfo or psychlit 
or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation" or scisearch).tw. 11759 
27 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 1940 
28 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw,sh. 2655 
29 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw,sh. 6059 
30 (peto or dersimonian or der simonian or fixed effect).tw,sh. 4041 
31 or/26-30 11940 
32 and/25,31 0 
33 or/24,32 12169 
34 letter.pt. 0 
35 case report.tw. 122 
36 comment.pt. 0 
37 editorial.pt. 0 
38 historical article.pt. 0 
39 or/34-38 122 
40 17 not 39 12210 
41 33 not 39 12066 
42 or/40-41 13589 
43 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 212 
44 preterm$.tw,tx. 574 
45 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 613 
46 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw,tx. 996 
47 or/43-46 1149 
48 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
49 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 

Neonatal jaundice 
434 
50 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
51 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
52 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw,tx. 5 
53 JAUNDICE.kw. 14 
54 jaundice$.ti. 10 
55 KERNICTERUS.kw. 1 
56 kernicterus.tw,tx. 14 
57 or/48-56 23 
58 METALLOPORPHYRINS.kw. 1 
59 PORPHYRINS.kw. 3 
60 (metalloporphyrin$ or protoporphyrin$ or mesoprophytin$).tw,tx. 7 
61 PORPHOBILINOGEN.kw. 0 
62 "HEME OXYGENASE (DECYCLIZING)".kw. 0 
63 SnMP.tw,tx. 0 
64 GAMMA-GLOBULINS.kw. 1 
65 gammaglobulin$.tw,tx. 7 
66 "gamma globulin$".tw,tx. 14 
67 IMMUNOGLOBULINS.kw. 50 
68 immun?globulin$.tw,tx. 251 
69 "immuno globulin$".tw,tx. 0 
70 "immune globulin$".tw,tx. 27 
71 phenobarb$.tw,tx. 81 
72 PHENYTOIN.kw. 14 
73 Phenytoin.tw,tx. 101 
74 CLOFIBRATE.kw. 4 
75 CHOLESTYRAMINE.kw. 3 
76 (cholestyramine$ or colestyramine$).tw,tx. 32 
77 AGAR.kw. 0 
78 CHARCOAL.kw. 4 
79 SUPPOSITORIES.kw. 3 
80 COMPLEMENTARY THERAPIES.kw. 84 
81 MEDICINE, HERBAL.kw. 4 
82 ((alternative or complementary or traditional or herbal or integrative) adj3 (therap$ or 
medicine$)).tw,tx. 964 
83 DRUGS, CHINESE HERBAL.kw. 60 
84 "yin chin".tw. 0 
85 manna.tw,tx. 0 
86 infusion$.tw,tx. 729 
87 PENICILLAMINE.kw. 6 
88 "d-penicillamin$".tw,tx. 23 
89 DIAZEPAM.kw. 14 
90 or/58-89 2000 
91 and/42,47,57,90 9 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
435 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2008 Week 49 
 
JAUN_other_treatments_hyperbil_embase_041208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 CLINICAL TRIALS/ 523012 
2 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).ti,ab,sh. 123857 
3 SINGLE BLIND PROCEDURE/ 7842 
4 DOUBLE BLIND PROCEDURE/ 70681 
5 RANDOM ALLOCATION/ 26340 
6 CROSSOVER PROCEDURE/ 20766 
7 PLACEBO/ 120719 
8 placebo$.ti,ab,sh. 171464 
9 random$.ti,ab,sh. 424569 
10 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 163469 
11 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj (blind$ or mask$)).ti,ab,sh. 92005 
12 randomi?ed control$ trial$.tw. 32313 
13 or/1-12 857875 
14 META ANALYSIS/ 34310 
15 ((meta adj analy$) or metaanalys$ or meta-analy$).ti,ab,sh. 44066 
16 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).ti,sh,ab. 26755 
17 (methodologic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).ti,ab,sh. 1631 
18 or/14-17 60986 
19 review.pt. 908965 
20 (medline or medlars or embase).ab. 23253 
21 (scisearch or science citation index).ab. 719 
22 (psychlit or psyclit or psychinfo or psycinfo or cinahl or cochrane).ab.  8491 
23 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 2670 
24 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw. 4286 
25 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw. 24587 
26 (peto or dersimonian or "der simonian" or fixed effect).tw. 880 
27 or/20-26 52240 
28 and/19,27 18549 
29 or/18,28 71320 
30 (book or conference paper or editorial or letter or note or proceeding or short survey).pt.  1719512 
31 13 not 30 733767 
32 29 not 31 33373 
33 or/31-32 767140 
34 PREMATURITY/ 29195 
35 preterm$.tw. 26540 
36 NEWBORN/ 178121 

Neonatal jaundice 
436 
37 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 97095 
38 or/34-37 238783 
39 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5702 
40 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 1737 
41 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1057 
42 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 16 
43 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 248 
44 JAUNDICE/ 9796 
45 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1737 
46 jaundice$.ti. 3642 
47 KERNICTERUS/ 710 
48 kernicterus$.ti. 150 
49 or/39-48 18115 
50 exp PORPHYRIN/ or UROPORPHYRIN/ or exp PORPHYRIN DERIVATIVE/  173835 
51 (metalloporphyrin$ or protoporphyrin$ or mesoprophytin$).tw. 4773 
52 porphobilinogen$.tw. 821 
53 
HEME OXYGENASE.mp. or HEME OXYGENASE 1/ or HEME OXYGENASE 2/ 
[mp=title, abstract, subject headings, heading word, drug trade name, original title, 
device manufacturer, drug manufacturer name] 
5287 
54 SnMp.tw. 71 
55 exp IMMUNOGLOBULIN/ 168343 
56 gammaglobulin$.tw. 1482 
57 "gamma globulin$".tw. 3801 
58 immun?globulin$.tw. 77114 
59 "immuno globulin$".tw. 66 
60 "immune globulin$".tw. 2079 
61 PHENOBARBITAL/ 31185 
62 phenobarb$.tw. 13026 
63 PHENYTOIN/ 35076 
64 phenytoin.tw. 8259 
65 CLOFIBRATE/ 5091 
66 COLESTYRAMINE/ 6654 
67 (cholestyramine$ or colestyramine$).tw. 1677 
68 AGAR/ 4871 
69 CHARCOAL/ 2304 
70 SUPPOSITORY/ 2067 
71 exp ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE/ or exp TRADITIONAL MEDICINE/ 32968 
72 ((alternative or complementary or traditional or herbal or integrative) adj3 (therap$ or 
medicine$)).tw. 26693 
73 "yin chin".tw. 2 
74 MANNAN/ 1619 
75 infusion$.tw. 147396 
76 PENICILLAMINE/ 11215 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
437 
77 "d-penicillamin$".tw. 2317 
78 DIAZEPAM/ 42601 
79 or/50-78 672505 
80 and/33,38,49,79 99 
 
 
CINAHL - Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health Literature 1982 to November Week 4 
2008 
 
JAUN_other_treatments_hyperbil_cinahl_041208 
 
# Searches Results 
1 exp CLINICAL TRIALS/ 67451 
2 clinical trial.pt. 35791 
3 (clinic$ adj5 trial$).tw,sh. 16660 
4 SINGLE-BLIND STUDIES/ 3223 
5 DOUBLE-BLIND STUDIES/ 12243 
6 TRIPLE-BLIND STUDIES/ 44 
7 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw,sh. 9133 
8 RANDOM ASSIGNMENT/ 19804 
9 random$.tw. 59499 
10 RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS/ 52404 
11 randomi?ed control$ trial$.tw. 13122 
12 PLACEBOS/ 4809 
13 placebo$.tw. 12467 
14 or/1-13 109025 
15 META ANALYSIS/ 7198 
16 ((meta adj analy$) or metaanalys$ or meta-analy$).tw. 5719 
17 SYSTEMATIC REVIEW/ 4138 
18 systematic review.pt. 13058 
19 (systematic$ adj5 (review$ or overview$)).tw. 10291 
20 LITERATURE REVIEW/ 2619 
21 or/15-20 24384 
22 ("review" or "review studies" or "review academic" or "review tutorial").ti,ab,sh,pt.  121038 
23 (medline or medlars or embase or cochrane or scisearch or psycinfo or psychinfo or 
psychlit or psyclit or "web of science" or "science citation").tw. 10568 
24 ((hand or manual$) adj2 search$).tw. 1147 
25 (electronic database$ or bibliographic database$ or computeri?ed database$ or online 
database$).tw. 2024 
26 (pooling or pooled or mantel haenszel).tw. 2984 
27 (peto or dersimonian or "der simonian" or fixed effect).tw. 453 
28 or/23-27 13988 
29 and/22,28 8201 
30 or/14,21,29 124217 

Neonatal jaundice 
438 
31 letter.pt. 67553 
32 commentary.pt. 89181 
33 editorial.pt. 94706 
34 or/31-33 202879 
35 30 not 34 110523 
36 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 6317 
37 preterm$.tw. 5421 
38 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 39579 
39 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 10039 
40 or/36-39 44557 
41 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 219 
42 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 143 
43 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 27 
44 JAUNDICE/ 224 
45 jaundice$.ti. 304 
46 KERNICTERUS/ 102 
47 kernicterus$.ti. 41 
48 or/41-47 735 
49 porphyrins/ or metalloporphyrins/ 92 
50 (metalloporphyrin$ or protoporphyrin$ or mesoprophytin$).tw. 84 
51 porphobilinogen.tw. 6 
52 heme oxygenase.tw. 92 
53 SnMP.tw. 6 
54 gamma globulins/ or exp immunoglobulins/ 3774 
55 gammaglobulin$.tw. 24 
56 "gamma globulin$".tw. 51 
57 immun?globulin$.tw. 1736 
58 "immuno globulin$".tw. 1 
59 "immune globulin$".tw. 215 
60 Phenobarbital/ 162 
61 phenobarb$.tw. 157 
62 Phenytoin/ 388 
63 phenytoin.tw. 327 
64 clofibrate.tw. 13 
65 Cholestyramine/ 57 
66 (cholestyramine$ or colestyramine$).tw. 34 
67 agar.tw. 341 
68 Charcoal/ 296 
69 Suppositories/ 135 
70 exp Alternative Therapies/ 60038 
71 exp medicine, herbal/ or exp medicine, traditional/ 12079 
72 Drugs, Chinese Herbal/ 552 
73 ((alternative or complementary or traditional or herbal or integrative) adj3 (therap$ or 8267 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
439 
medicine$)).tw. 
74 "yin chin".tw. 0 
75 manna$.tw. 38 
76 infusion.tw. 5939 
77 Penicillamine/ 55 
78 "d-penicillamin$".tw. 28 
79 Diazepam/ 279 
80 or/49-79 74802 
81 and/35,40,48,80 15 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_other_treatments_hyperbil_cinahl_041208 
 
Friday, May 01, 2009 5:22:11 AM  
#  Query  Limiters/ 
Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S61  S5 and S17 and S60  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
129  
S60  S36 or S59  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
80303  
S59  
S37 or S38 or S39 or S40 
or S41 or S42 or S43 or 
S44 or S45 or S46 or S47 
or S48 or S49 or S50 or 
S51 or S52 or S53 or S54 
or S55 or S56 or S57 or 
S58  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
74666  
S58  immune globulin*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
351  
S57  MH DIAZEPAM  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
301  
S56  TI (d penicillamin*) or AB 
(d penicillamin*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 32  

Neonatal jaundice 
440 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S55  MH PENICILLAMINE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
59  
S54  TI (infusion) or AB 
(infusion)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
6714  
S53  TI (manna*) or AB 
(manna*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
39  
S52  TI (yin chin) or AB (yin 
chin)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
0  
S51  
TI (integrative N3 
medicine*) or AB 
(integrative N3 medicine*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
294  
S50  
TI (integrative N3 therap*) 
or AB (integrative N3 
therap*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
126  
S49  
TI (herbal N3 medicine*) 
or AB (herbal N3 
medicine*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
969  
S48  TI (herbal N3 therap*) or 
AB (herbal N3 therap*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
282  
S47  
TI (traditional N3 
medicine*) or AB 
(traditional N3 medicine*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
1288  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
441 
S46  
TI (traditional N3 therap*) 
or AB (traditional N3 
therap*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
608  
S45  
TI (alternative N3 
medicine*) or AB 
(alternative N3 medicine*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
2708  
S44  
TI (alternative N3 therap*) 
or AB (alternative N3 
therap*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
2182  
S43  MH DRUGS, CHINESE 
HERBAL  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
647  
S42  MH MEDICINE, 
TRADITIONAL+  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
12848  
S41  MH MEDICINE, 
HERBAL+  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
4246  
S40  MH ALTERNATIVE 
THERAPIES+  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
63683  
S39  MH SUPPOSITORIES  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
149  
S38  MH CHARCOAL  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
306  
S37  TI (agar*) or AB (agar*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
510  

Neonatal jaundice 
442 
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S36  
S18 or S19 or S20 or S21 
or S22 or S23 or S24 or 
S25 or S26 or S27 or S28 
or S29 or S30 or S31 or 
S32 or S33 or S34 or S35  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
6179  
S35  AB (cholestyramine* or 
colestyramine*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
33  
S34  TI (cholestyramine* or 
colestyramine*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
11  
S33  MH CHOLESTYRAMINE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
60  
S32  TI (clofibrate) or AB 
(clofibrate)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
14  
S31  TI (phenytoin) or AB 
(phenytoin)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
363  
S30  MH PHENYTOIN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
410  
S29  TI (phenobarb*) or AB 
(phenobarb*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
181  
S28  MH PHENOBARBITAL  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
178  
S27  TI (immunglobulin* or Search modes - Interface - EBSCOhost  1952  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
443 
immunoglobulin*) or AB 
(immunglobulin* or 
immunoglobulin*)  
Boolean/Phrase  Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S26  
TI (gamma globulin* or 
gamma globulin*) or AB 
(gamma globulin* or 
gamma globulin*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
60  
S25  TI (heme oxygenase) or AB 
(heme oxygenase)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
115  
S24  MH 
IMMUNOGLOBULINS+  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
4068  
S23  MH GAMMA GLOBULINS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
58  
S22  TI (SnMP) or AB (SnMP)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
6  
S21  TI (porphobilinogen*) or 
AB (porphobilinogen*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
7  
S20  
TI (metalloporphyrin* or 
protoporphyrin* or 
mesoprophytin*) or AB 
(metalloporphyrin* or 
protoporphyrin* or 
mesoprophytin*)  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
90  
S19  MH 
METALLOPORPHYRINS  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
34  
S18  MH PORPHYRINS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
79  

Neonatal jaundice 
444 
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S17  
S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or S10 
or S11 or S12 or S13 or 
S14 or S15 or S16  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
826  
S16  (TI "kernicterus*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
49  
S15  MH KERNICTERUS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
110  
S14  (TI jaundice*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
329  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
248  
S12  (AB "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
3  
S11  (TI "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
0  
S10  (AB "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
25  
S9  (TI "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
8  
S8  (TI "bilirubinaemia" OR Search modes - Interface - EBSCOhost  6  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
445 
"bilirubinemia")  Boolean/Phrase  Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S7  (TI "hyperbilirubinemia" or 
"hyperbilirubinaemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
196  
S6  MH 
HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
236  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
47455  
S4  
(TI "newborn*" or 
"neonate*") or (AB 
"newborn*" or 
"neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
10880  
S3  MH INFANT, NEWBORN  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
41764  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB 
"preterm*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
5956  
S1  MH INFANT, 
PREMATURE  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - 
Advanced Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
6737 
 
 
AMED (Allied and Complementary Medicine) 1985 to March 2009 
 
JAUN_other_treatments_hyperbil_amed_260309 
 
# Searches Results 
1 exp INFANT NEWBORN/ 334 
2 (prematur$ adj3 (infant$ or baby or babies)).tw. 150 

Neonatal jaundice 
446 
3 preterm$.tw. 143 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 493 
5 or/1-4 685 
6 hyperbilirubin?emi$.tw. 12 
7 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 0 
8 JAUNDICE/ 32 
9 jaundice$.tw. 131 
10 kernicterus.tw. 3 
11 or/6-10 143 
12 (metalloporphyrin$ or protoporphyrin$ or mesoprophytin$).tw. 7 
13 porphobilinogen.tw. 0 
14 heme oxygenase.tw. 11 
15 SnMP.tw. 0 
16 gamma globulin$.tw. 7 
17 exp IMMUNOGLOBULINS/ 64 
18 immun?globulin$.tw. 125 
19 "immuno globulin$".tw. 0 
20 "immune globulin$".tw. 1 
21 phenobarb$.tw. 42 
22 phenytoin.tw. 44 
23 clofibrate.tw. 1 
24 cholestyramine.tw. 0 
25 colestyramine$.tw. 0 
26 agar.tw. 166 
27 charcoal.tw. 44 
28 SUPPOSITORIES/ 2 
29 exp COMPLEMENTARY THERAPIES/ 39578 
30 exp HERBAL DRUGS/ or exp DRUGS CHINESE HERBAL/ or exp HERBALISM/ 8656 
31 ((alternative or complementary or traditional or herbal or integrative) adj3 (therap$ or 
medicine$)).tw. 13567 
32 yin chin.tw. 0 
33 manna.tw. 0 
34 infusion$.tw. 422 
35 penicillamine.tw. 3 
36 d penicillamine.tw. 1 
37 diazepam.tw. 78 
38 or/12-37 48662 
39 and/5,11,38 5 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
447 
QUESTION: (i)What are the appropriate criteria for monitoring babies with jaundice who are at 
lower risk of developing neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia/kernicterus.  
(ii) What are the appropriate criteria for monitoring babies diagnosed with neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia who do not require immediate treatment? 
 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to March Week 2 2009 
 
JAUN_Q10_monitor_medline_200309 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 32368 
2 preterm$.tw. 29467 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 415422 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 137510 
5 or/1-4 473411 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3391 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 179 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2160 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 148 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 288 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 9895 
12 jaundice$.ti. 9604 
13 or/6-12 19658 
14 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 1304 
15 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1864 
16 tsb.tw. 527 
17 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 11255 
18 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 857 
19 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 99199 
20 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 40976 
21 RISK FACTORS/ 371020 
22 risk factor$.tw. 203523 
23 or/19-22 552451 
24 exp MONITORING, PHYSIOLOGIC/ 93688 
25 (monitor$ or assess$ or check$ or measure$).tw. 2510349 
26 or/14-18,24-25 2555927 
27 26 and 23 and 13 279 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 1st Quarter 2009 
 
JAUN_Q10_monitor_cctr_200309 
 
 
# Searches Results 

Neonatal jaundice 
448 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1763 
2 preterm$.tw. 3175 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8634 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4338 
5 or/1-4 11718 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 11 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 10 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 54 
12 jaundice$.ti. 199 
13 or/6-12 445 
14 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 119 
15 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 190 
16 tsb.tw. 26 
17 BILIRUBIN/bl [Blood] 491 
18 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 22 
19 RISK ASSESSMENT/ 3167 
20 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 1714 
21 RISK FACTORS/ 10860 
22 risk factor$.tw. 8588 
23 or/19-22 18928 
24 exp MONITORING, PHYSIOLOGIC/ 5952 
25 (monitor$ or assess$ or check$ or measure$).tw. 186478 
26 or/14-18,24-25 188292 
27 and/5,13,23,26 5 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_Q10_monitor_cdsrdare_200309 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 216 
2 preterm$.tw,tx. 586 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 632 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw,tx. 1024 
5 or/1-4 1180 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw,tx. 5 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
449 
11 JAUNDICE.kw. 15 
12 jaundice$.ti. 10 
13 or/6-12 19 
14 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw,tx. 15 
15 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw,tx. 24 
16 tsb.tw,tx. 1 
17 BILIRUBIN.kw. 4 
18 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw,tx. 5 
19 RISK ASSESSMENT.kw. 297 
20 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw,tx. 2532 
21 RISK FACTORS.kw. 639 
22 risk factor$.tw,tx. 1797 
23 or/19-22 3770 
24 MONITORING, PHYSIOLOGIC.kw. 24 
25 (monitor$ or assess$ or check$ or measure$).tw,tx. 11886 
26 or/14-18,24-25 11886 
27 and/5,13,23,26 3 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2009 Week 12 
 
JAUN_Q10_monitor_embase_200309 
 
 
# Searches Results 
1 PREMATURITY/ 29715 
2 preterm$.tw. 27075 
3 NEWBORN/ 179953 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 98486 
5 or/1-4 241790 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5856 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1072 
8 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 16 
9 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 255 
10 JAUNDICE/ 10024 
11 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1771 
12 jaundice$.ti. 3683 
13 or/6-12 18257 
14 (total adj3 serum adj3 bilirubin$).tw. 1224 
15 (serum adj3 bilirubin$ adj3 level$).tw. 1610 
16 tsb.tw. 397 
17 exp Bilirubin/ 16861 
18 bilirubin blood level/ 7172 
19 (unconjugated adj3 bilirubin).tw. 660 

Neonatal jaundice 
450 
20 or/14-19 19735 
21 risk assessment/ 178969 
22 risk factor/ 242752 
23 (risk$ adj3 (assess$ or index or model$)).tw. 38687 
24 risk factor$.tw. 186438 
25 or/21-24 459071 
26 BIOLOGICAL MONITORING/ 9396 
27 (monitor$ or assess$ or check$ or measure$).tw. 2211279 
28 or/26-27 2214066 
29 or/20,28 2228449 
30 and/5,13,25,29 278 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_Q10_monitor_cinahl_230309 
 
Tuesday, March 24, 2009 7:53:17 AM  
#  Query  Limiters/ 
Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S31  S5 and S15 and S23 and 
S30  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
61  
S30  S24 or S25 or S26 or S27 
or S28 or S29  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
105500  
S29  risk factor*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
92330  
S28  MH RISK FACTORS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
35295  
S27  risk* N3 model*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
1390  
S26  risk* N3 index*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 626  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
451 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S25  risk* N3 assess*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
21048  
S24  MH RISK ASSESSMENT  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
16760  
S23  S16 or S17 or S18 or S19 
or S20 or S21 or S22  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
363637  
S22  monitor* or assess* or 
check* or measure*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
354439  
S21  MH MONITORING, 
PHYSIOLOGIC+  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
26751  
S20  unconjugated N3 
bilirubin  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
25  
S19  MH BILIRUBIN/BL  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
289  
S18  tsb  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
41  
S17  serum N3 bilirubin* N3 
level*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
85  

Neonatal jaundice 
452 
S16  total N3 serum N3 
bilirubin*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
90  
S15  
S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or 
S10 or S11 or S12 or S13 
or S14  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
742  
S14  TI jaundice*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
328  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
238  
S12  hyperbilirubin* N3 
encephalopath*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
3  
S11  bilirubin* N3 
encephalopath*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
32  
S10  TI bilirubinemia  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
1  
S9  TI bilirubinaemia  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
0  
S8  TI hyperbilirubinaemia  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
17  
S7  TI hyperbilirubinemia  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
140  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
453 
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S6  MH 
HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
234  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
46957  
S4  (newborn* OR neonate*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
43950  
S3  MH INFANT, 
NEWBORN  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
41224  
S2  preterm*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
5868  
S1  MH INFANT, 
PREMATURE  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
6597 
 
 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
454 
QUESTION:  What information and support should be given to parents/carers of babies with 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia? 
 
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1950 to March Week 3 2009 
 
JAUN_Q13_infosupport_medline_010409_2 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 32387 
2 preterm$.tw. 29486 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 415634 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 137581 
5 or/1-4 473662 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 3391 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 179 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2160 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 148 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 288 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 9897 
12 jaundice$.ti. 9604 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 882 
14 kernicterus.tw. 655 
15 or/6-14 20332 
16 HEALTH EDUCATION/ or PATIENT EDUCATION AS TOPIC/ 97466 
17 (information$ or education$ or communication$ or advice or advice).ti.  158771 
18 PAMPHLETS/ 2478 
19 (booklet$ or leaflet$ or pamphlet$ or brochure$ or hand?out$).tw. 14834 
20 (educat$ adj3 (video$ or literature$)).tw. 1128 
21 SELF-HELP GROUPS/ 6446 
22 ((support$ or self-help$) adj3 group$).tw. 9067 
23 patient education handout.pt. 2643 
24 guideline.pt. 14517 
25 practice guideline.pt. 12999 
26 HOTLINES/ 1698 
27 help line$.tw. 64 
28 INTERNET/ 28890 
29 ((internet or web) adj based).tw. 7028 
30 TELEPHONE/ 7139 
31 (telephone adj2 support).tw. 230 
32 or/16-31 309649 
33 and/5,15,32 38 
 
 
EBM Reviews - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 1st Quarter 2009 
 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
455 
JAUN_Q13_infosupport_cctr_010409_2 
 
 
# Searches Results 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE/ 1763 
2 preterm$.tw. 3175 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN/ 8634 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 4338 
5 or/1-4 11718 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 58 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL/ 11 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 149 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 4 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 10 
11 exp JAUNDICE/ 54 
12 jaundice$.ti. 199 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 2 
14 kernicterus.tw. 8 
15 or/6-14 450 
16 HEALTH EDUCATION/ or PATIENT EDUCATION AS TOPIC/ 5434 
17 (information$ or education$ or communication$ or advice or advice).ti.  5700 
18 PAMPHLETS/ 393 
19 (booklet$ or leaflet$ or pamphlet$ or brochure$ or hand?out$).tw. 1207 
20 (educat$ adj3 (video$ or literature$)).tw. 209 
21 SELF-HELP GROUPS/ 333 
22 ((support$ or self-help$) adj3 group$).tw. 1865 
23 patient education handout.pt. 6 
24 guideline.pt. 24 
25 practice guideline.pt. 17 
26 HOTLINES/ 55 
27 help line$.tw. 5 
28 INTERNET/ 498 
29 ((internet or web) adj based).tw. 450 
30 TELEPHONE/ 713 
31 (telephone adj2 support).tw. 122 
32 or/16-31 12910 
33 and/5,15,32 0 
 
 
DARE, CDSR 
 
JAUN_Q13_infosupport_cdsrdare_010409_2 
 
 
# Searches Results 

Neonatal jaundice 
456 
1 INFANT, PREMATURE.kw. 216 
2 preterm$.tw,tx. 586 
3 INFANT, NEWBORN.kw. 632 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw,tx. 1024 
5 or/1-4 1180 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.kw. 3 
7 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA, NEONATAL.kw. 1 
8 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 2 
9 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 0 
10 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw,tx. 5 
11 JAUNDICE.kw. 15 
12 jaundice$.ti. 10 
13 KERNICTERUS.kw. 1 
14 kernicterus.tw,tx. 15 
15 or/6-14 24 
16 (HEALTH EDUCATION or PATIENT EDUCATION AS TOPIC).kw. 367 
17 (information$ or education$ or communication$ or advice or advice).ti.  231 
18 PAMPHLETS.kw. 5 
19 (booklet$ or leaflet$ or pamphlet$ or brochure$ or hand?out$).tw,tx.  270 
20 (educat$ adj3 (video$ or literature$)).tw,tx. 48 
21 SELF-HELP GROUPS.kw. 32 
22 ((support$ or self-help$) adj3 group$).tw,tx. 787 
23 patient education handout.pt. 0 
24 guideline.pt. 0 
25 practice guideline.pt. 0 
26 HOTLINES.kw. 2 
27 help line$.tw,tx. 13 
28 INTERNET.kw. 23 
29 ((internet or web) adj based).tw,tx. 125 
30 TELEPHONE.kw. 22 
31 (telephone adj2 support).tw,tx. 45 
32 or/16-31 1467 
33 and/5,15,32 1 
 
 
EMBASE 1980 to 2009 Week 13 
 
JAUN_Q13_infosupport_embase_020409_2 
 
# Searches Results 
1 PREMATURITY/ 29758 
2 preterm$.tw. 27105 
3 NEWBORN/ 180064 
4 (newborn$ or neonate$).tw. 98572 

Appendix I: Search strategies 
457 
5 or/1-4 241975 
6 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA/ 5862 
7 hyperbilirubin?emia$.ti. 1072 
8 bilirubin?emia$.ti. 16 
9 ((bilirubin$ or hyperbilirubin$) adj3 encephalopath$).tw. 255 
10 JAUNDICE/ 10032 
11 NEWBORN JAUNDICE/ 1772 
12 jaundice$.ti. 3687 
13 KERNICTERUS/ 729 
14 kernicterus$.ti. 154 
15 or/6-14 18536 
16 PATIENT INFORMATION/ 12976 
17 (information adj1 (provid$ or provision$ or supply$)).tw. 23297 
18 PATIENT EDUCATION/ 27311 
19 (patient$ adj3 educat$).tw. 11149 
20 (booklet$ or leaflet$ or pamphlet$ or brochure$ or hand?out$).tw. 11345 
21 (educat$ adj3 (video$ or literature$)).tw. 634 
22 SELF HELP/ 3169 
23 ((support$ or self-help$) adj3 group$).tw. 7033 
24 CONSUMER HEALTH INFORMATION/ or INFORMATION SERVICE/ or MEDICAL 
INFORMATION/ 35285 
25 INTERNET/ or TELEPHONE/ 37478 
26 (telephone adj2 support).tw. 160 
27 ((internet or web) adj based).tw. 5104 
28 (hotline$ or help line$).tw. 378 
29 exp PRACTICE GUIDELINE/ 147283 
30 or/16-29 286967 
31 and/5,15,30 148 
 
 
CINAHL EBSCO 
 
JAUN_Q13_infosupport_embase_020409_5 
 
Thursday, April 02, 2009 7:31:15 AM  
#  Query  Limiters/ 
Expanders  Last Run Via  Results  
S38  S5 and S17 and S37  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
113  
S37  
S18 or S19 or S20 or S21 
or S22 or S23 or S24 or 
S25 or S26 or S27 or S28 
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
432694  

Neonatal jaundice 
458 
or S29 or S30 or S31 or 
S32 or S33 or S34 or S35 
or S36  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S36  MH PRACTICE 
GUIDELINES  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
17274  
S35  telephone N2 support  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
202  
S34  web based  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
2229  
S33  internet based  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
677  
S32  MH INTERNET  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
12638  
S31  help line*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
225  
S30  helpline*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
345  
S29  
MH TELEPHONE 
INFORMATION 
SERVICES  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
1589  
S28  self-help N3 group*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
458  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
459 
S27  selfhelp N3 group*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
3  
S26  support* N3 group*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
7118  
S25  MH SUPPORT GROUPS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
4537  
S24  educat* N3 literature*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
856  
S23  educat* N3 video*  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
375  
S22  
booklet* or leaflet* or 
pamphlet* or brochure* 
or handout*  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
3395  
S21  MH PAMPHLETS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
1395  
S20  
information* or 
education* or 
communication* or 
advice or advise  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
410021  
S19  MH PATIENT 
EDUCATION  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
28363  
S18  MH HEALTH 
EDUCATION  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
9160  

Neonatal jaundice 
460 
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S17  
S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or 
S10 or S11 or S12 or S13 
or S14 or S15 or S16  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
813  
S16  (TI "kernicterus*")  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S15  MH KERNICTERUS  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S14  (TI jaundice*)  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S13  MH JAUNDICE  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S12  (AB "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S11  (TI "hyperbilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S10  (AB "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S9  (TI "bilirubin*" N3 
"encephalopath*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S8  (TI "bilirubinaemia" OR Search modes - Interface - EBSCOhost  Display  

Appendix I: Search strategies 
461 
"bilirubinemia")  Boolean/Phrase  Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
S7  (TI "hyperbilirubinemia" 
or "hyperbilirubinaemia")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S6  MH 
HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S5  S1 or S2 or S3 or S4  Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S4  
(TI "newborn*" or 
"neonate*") or (AB 
"newborn*" or 
"neonate*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S3  MH INFANT, 
NEWBORN  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S2  (TI "preterm*") or (AB 
"preterm*")  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display  
S1  MH INFANT, 
PREMATURE  
Search modes - 
Boolean/Phrase  
Interface - EBSCOhost  
Search Screen - Advanced 
Search  
Database - CINAHL with 
Full Text  
Display 
 
 
 
 

 
462 
Appendix J 
Excluded studies 
Which factors affect the relationship between neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and kernicterus or other adverse outcomes (neurode velopmental, auditory)? 
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Bertini G, Dani C, Tronchin M et al. Is breastfeeding really favoring early neonatal jaundice? Pediatrics 2001; 107:(3)E41. No analysis for confounding variables 
Beutner D, Foerst A, Lang-Roth R et al. Risk factors for auditory neuropathy/auditory synaptopathy. ORL 2007; 69:(4)239–44. No adjustment for confounding variables 
Bhutani VK and Johnson LH. Jaundice technologies: prediction of hyperbilirubinemia in term and near-term newborns. Journal of 
Perinatology 2001; 21 Suppl 1:S76-S82. 
Overview 
Bhutani VK. Combining clinical risk factors with serum bilirubin levels to predict hyperbilirubinemia in newborns. Journal of 
Pediatrics 2005; 147:(1)123–4. 
Synopsis 
Blackmon LR, Fanaroff AA, and Raju TNK. Research on prevention of bilirubin-induced brain injury and kernicterus: National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development conference executive summary.  Pediatrics 2004; 114:(1)229–33. 
Overview of jaundice research 
Brites D, Fernandes A, Falcao AS et al. Biological risks for neurological abnormalities associated with hyperbilirubinemia. J 
Perinatol 0 AD; 29:(S1)S8-S13. 
Overview - Background 
Cronin CM, Brown DR, and hdab-Barmada M. Risk factors associated with kernicterus in the newborn infant: importance of 
benzyl alcohol exposure. American Journal of Perinatology 1991; 8:(2)80–5. 
Benzyl alcohol as a risk factor for kernicterus 
De Vries LS, Lary S, Whitelaw AG et al. Relationship of serum bilirubin levels and hearing impairment in newborn infants. Early 
Human Development 1987; 15:(5)269–77. 
Outcome not of interest to this guideline 
Ding G, Zhang S, Yao D et al.  An epidemiological survey on neonatal jaundice in China. Chinese Medical Journal 2001; 
114:(4)344–7. 
No adjustment for confounding variables 
Frishberg Y, Zelicovic I, Merlob P et al. Hyperbilirubnemia and influencing factors in term infants. Israel Journal of Medical 
Sciences 1989; 25:(1)28–31. 
Confounders not controlled for 
Gagnon AJ, Waghorn K, Jones MA et al. Indicators nurses employ in deciding to test for hyperbilirubinemia. JOGNN - Journal of 
Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing 2001; 30:(6)626–33. 
Background 
Gartner LM and Arias IM. Studies of prolonged neonatal jaundice in the breast-fed infant. Journal of Pediatrics 1966; 68:(1)54–66. No adjustment for confounders 
Geiger AM, Petitti DB, and Yao JF. Rehospitalisation for neonatal jaundice: risk factors and outcomes. Paediatric and Perinatal 
Epidemiology 2001; 15:(4)352–8. 
Risk factors for jaundice readmission – 
confounders not controlled for 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
463 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Gourley GR. Another risk factor for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition 2005; 
40:(3)388–9. 
Synospis 
Grupp-Phelan J, Taylor JA, Liu LL et al. Early newborn hospital discharge and readmission for mild and severe jaundice. Archives 
of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 1999; 153:(12)1283–8. 
Effect of early discharge on jaundice readmission 
rates 
Guo X, Pu X, An T et al. Characteristics of brainstem auditory evoked potential of neonates with mild or moderate 
hyperbilirubinemia. Neural Regeneration Research 2007; 2:(11)660–4. 
No comparison group 
Hall RT, Simon S, and Smith MT. Readmission of breastfed infants in the first 2 weeks of life. Journal of Perinatology 2000; 
20:(7)432–7. 
Risk factors for readmission of breastfed babies 
Harris MC, Bernbaum JC, Polin JR et al. Developmental follow-up of breastfed term and near-term infants with marked 
hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics 2001; 107:(5)1075–80. 
Developmental follow-up of babies with bilirubin 
> 451 micromol/litre 
Huang MJ, Kua KE, Teng HC et al. Risk factors for severe hyperbilirubinemia in neonates. Pediatric Research 2004; 56:(5)682–9. Only breastfeeding and genetic risk factors 
considered 
Iranpour R, Akbar MR, and Haghshenas I. Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in Neonates. Indian Journal of 
Pediatrics 2003; 70:(11)855–7. 
G6PD deficiency as a risk factor for jaundice 
Johnson L. Hyperbilirubinemia in the term infant: When to worry, when to treat. New York State Journal of Medicine 1991; 
91:(11)483–9. 
Overview 
Kaplan M, Bromiker R, Schimmel MS et al. Evaluation of discharge management in the prediction of hyperbilirubinemia: the 
Jerusalem experience. Journal of Pediatrics 2007; 150:(4)412–7. 
Effect of discharge management on readmission 
rates 
Kaplan M, Herschel M, Hammerman C et al. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in African American males: the importance of glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Journal of Pediatrics 2006; 149:(1)83–8. 
Study restricted to African-American males babies 
Madlon-Kay DJ. The clinical significance of ABO blood group incompatibility. Archives of Family Medicine 1993; 2:(3)285–7. ABO incompatibility as a  risk factor for jaundice 
Maisels MJ and Kring E. Length of stay, jaundice, and hospital readmission. Pediatrics 1998; 101:(6)995–8. Risk factors for readmission for jaundice – 
confounders not controlled for 
Nakamura H. Assessing the risk of kernicterus. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 1987; 54:(5)625–31. Unbound bilirubin as a risk factor for kernicterus 
Ogun B, Serbetcioglu B, Duman N et al. Long-term outcome of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia: subjective and objective 
audiological measures. Clinical Otolaryngology and Allied Sciences 2003; 28:(6)507–13. 
Long-term sequelae of hyperbilirubinaemia 
Olusanya BO, Akande AA, Emokpae A et al. Infants with severe neonatal jaundice in Lagos, Nigeria: Incidence, correlates and 
hearing screening outcomes. Tropical Medicine and International Health 2009; 14:(3)301–10. 
Effect of severe neonatal jaundice on hearing 
outcomes 
Paul IM, Lehman EB, Hollenbeak CS et al. Preventable newborn readmissions since passage of the Newborns' and Mothers' 
Health Protection Act. Pediatrics 2006; 118:(6)2349–58. 
Predictors of readmission after hospital discharge 
Paul IM, Phillips TA, Widome MD et al. Cost-effectiveness of postnatal home nursing visits for prevention of hospital care for 
jaundice and dehydration. Pediatrics  2004; 114:(4)1015–22. 
Not relevant to this quideline 
Phuapradit W, Chaturachinda K, and Auntlamai S. Risk factors for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of the Medical 
Association of Thailand 1993; 76:(8)424–8. 
No regression analysis 
Sales de Almeida F, Pialarissi PR, Monte AA et al. Otoacoustic emissions and ABR: Study in hyperbilirubinemic newborns. Revista 
Brasileira de Otorrinolaringologia 2002; 68:(6)851–7. 
Outcome not of interest to this guideline 

Neonatal jaundice 
464 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Sarici SU, Serdar MA, Korkmaz A et al. Incidence, course, and prediction of hyperbilirubinemia in near-term and term newborns. 
Pediatrics 2004; 113:(4)775–80. 
Not adjustment for confounding variables 
Setia S, Villaveces A, Dhillon P et al. Neonatal jaundice in Asian, white, and mixed-race infants. Archives of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine 2002; 156:(3)276–9. 
Ethnicity (at least one Asian parent) as a risk factor 
for jaundice 
Shah VA and Cheo LY. Identifying risk of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and early discharge for glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficient newborns in Singapore. Annals of the Academy of Medicine Singapore 2007; 36:(12)1003–9. 
G6PD deficient babies only 
Stiehm ER and Ryan J. Breast-milk jaundice. Report of eight cases and effect of breast feeding on incidence and severity of 
unexplained hyperbilirubinaemia. American Journal of Diseases of Children 1965; 109:212–6. 
Case-studies 
Thoma J, Gerull G, and Mrowinski D. A long-term study of hearing in children following neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Archives of 
Oto-Rhino-Laryngology 1986; 243:(2)133. 
Non-comparative study 
Tudehope D, Bayley G, Munro D et al. Breast feeding practices and severe hyperbilirubinaemia. Journal of Paediatrics and Child 
Health 1991; 27:(4)240–4. 
Link between breastfeeding and early onset 
jaundice 
van de Bor M, Ens-Dokkum M, Schreuder AM et al. Hyperbilirubinemia in low birth weight infants and outcome at 5 years of age. 
Pediatrics 1992; 89:(3)359–64. 
Outcome, at 5 year, of low-birthweight babies 
with hyperbilirubinamia 
van de Bor M, van Zeben-van der Aa TM 
, Verloove-Vanhorick SP et al. Hyperbilirubinemia in preterm infants and neurodevelopmental outcome at 2 years of age: Results 
of a national collaborative survey. Pediatrics 1989; 83:(6)915–20. 
Long term sequelae of hyperbilirubinaemia in 
preterm babies 
Vohr BR. New approaches to assessing the risks of hyperbilirubinemia. Clinics in Perinatology 1990; 17:(2)293–306. Overview 
Watchko JF. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia -- what are the risks? New England Journal of Medicine 2006; 354:(18)1947–9. Overview 
Yaish HM, Niazi GA, Al S et al. Increased incidence of hyperbilirubinaemia in 'unchallenged' glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency in term Saudi newborns. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics 1991; 11:(3)259–66. 
No adjustment for confounding variables 
Young-Lewis LE. Factors contributing to the readmission of previously healthy low-risk neonates for hyperbilirubinemia. (CASE 
WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY) **1996; PH.D 146. 
PHd thesis  
 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
465 
What is the best method of recognising hyperbilirubinaemia? 
When should a baby with hyperbilirubinaemia be referred for further testing or formal assessment?  
How useful are the following tests in predicting neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia?  
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Akman I, Arikan C, Bilgen H et al. Transcutaneous measurement of bilirubin by icterometer during phototherapy on a bilibed. 
Turkish Journal of Medical Sciences 2002; 32:(2)165–8. 
Transcutaneous measurement undergoing 
phototherapy 
Amato M, Huppi P, and Markus D. Assessment of neonatal jaundice in low birth weight infants comparing transcutaneous, 
capillary and arterial bilirubin levels. European Journal of Pediatrics 1990; 150:(1)59–61. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Awasthi S and Rehman H. Early prediction of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 1998; 65:(1)131–9. Poor quality study – EL 3 
Barko HA, Jackson GL, and Engle WD. Evaluation of a point-of-care direct spectrophotometric method for measurement of total 
serum bilirubin in term and near-term neonates. Journal of Perinatology 2006; 26:(2)100–5. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Bhardwaj HP, Narang A, and Bhakoo ON. Evaluation of Minolta jaundicemeter and icterometer for assessment of neonatal 
jaundice. Indian Pediatrics 1989; 26:(2)161–5. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Bhat V, Srinivasan S, Usha TS et al. Correlation of transcutaneous bilirubinometry with serum bilirubin in south Indian neonates. 
Indian Journal of Medical Research 1987; 86:49–52. 
Reference tests was not a laboratory based test 
Bhat YR and Rao A. Transcutaneous bilirubin in predicting hyperbilirubinemia in term neonates. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 
2008; 75:(2)119–23. 
Poor quality study 
Bjerre JV and Ebbesen F. [Incidence of kernicterus in newborn infants in Denmark]. Ugeskrift for Laeger 2006; 168:(7)686–91. Non-English language article 
Bourchier D, Cull AB, and Oettli PE. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry: 22 months experience at Waikato women's Hospital. New 
Zealand Medical Journal 1987; 100:(832)599–600. 
Unclear of timing of tests 
Bredemeyer SL, Polverino JM, and Beeby PJ. Assessment of jaundice in the term infant - accuracy of transcutaneous 
bilirubinometers compared with serum bilirubin levels: part two. Neonatal, Paediatric and Child Health Nursing 2007; 10:(1)5–
10, 12. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Brouwers HA, Overbeeke MA, van E, I et al. What is the best predictor of the severity of ABO-haemolytic disease of the newborn? 
Lancet 1988; 2:641–4. 
Study evaluating predictors of the severity of 
ABO-haemolytic disease of the newborn 
Carapella E, Gloria-Bottini F, Tucciarone L et al. Annotations on the hyperbilirubinaemia of ABO incompatible infants. 
Haematologia 1982; 15:(1)127–33. 
Not relevant to this guideline 
Carceller-Blanchard A, Cousineau J, and Delvin EE. Point of care testing: transcutaneous bilirubinometry in neonates. Clinical 
Biochemistry 2009; 42:(3)143–9. 
Background information 
Centre for Reviews and Dissemination. The value of routine bilirubin screening to detect significant hyperbilirubinemia in Thai 
healthy term newborns (Brief record). NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHSEED) 2008;(2). 
Synopsis 
Centre for Reviews and Dissemination. Using Bilicheck for preterm neonates in a sub-intensive unit: diagnostic usefulness and 
suitability (Brief record). NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHSEED) 2008;(2). 
Synopsis 
Chuansumrit A, Siripoonya P, Nathalang O et al. The benefit of the direct antiglobulin test using gel technique in ABO hemolytic 
disease of the newborn. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public Health 1997; 28:(2)428–31. 
Comparison of two methods of DAT testing 

Neonatal jaundice 
466 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Conseil d’Evaluation des Technologies de la Sante. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in the context of early postnatal discharge 
(Structured abstract). Health Technology Assessment Database 2008;(3). 
Overview 
Dai J, Krahn J, and Parry DM. Clinical impact of transcutaneous bilirubinometry as an adjunctive screen for hyperbilirubinemia. 
Clinical Biochemistry 1996; 29:(6)581–6. 
Effectiveness of Minolta  JM-102  
De Luca D, Romagnoli C, Tiberi E et al. Skin bilirubin nomogram for the first 96 h of life in a European normal healthy newborn 
population, obtained with multiwavelength transcutaneous bilirubinometry. Acta Paediatrica, International Journal of Paediatrics 
2008; 97:(2)146–50. 
Development of a nomogram based on 
transcutaneous measurement 
De Luca D, Zecca E, Zuppa AA et al. The joint use of human and electronic eye: Visual assessment of jaundice and 
transcutaneous bilirubinometry. Turkish Journal of Pediatrics 2008; 50:(5)456–61. 
Incomplete data – correlation data or 
sensitivity/specificity data not reported 
Dinesh D. Review of positive direct antiglobulin tests found on cord blood sampling. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 
2005; 41:(9–10)504–10. 
Incomplete data – number of true negative snot 
reported 
Donzelli G and Pratesi S. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in healthy preterm newborns. Clinical Biochemistry 2000; 33:(6)505–8. Study examined the use of JM-102 in preterm 
babies 
Engle WD, Jackson GL, Sendelbach D et al. Assessment of a transcutaneous device in the evaluation of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia in a primarily Hispanic population. Pediatrics 2002; 110:(1 I)61–7. 
Not all tests carried out with 1-hour 
Facchini FP, Mezzacappa MA, Rosa IRM et al. Follow-up of neonatal jaundice in term and late premature newborns. [Portuguese, 
English]. Jornal de Pediatria 2007; 83:(4)313–8. 
Not a comparative study 
Flaherman VJ, Ferrara A, and Newman TB. Predicting significant hyperbilirubinaemia using birth weight. Archives of Disease in 
Childhood - Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2008; 93:(4)F307-F309. 
Birthweight as a predictor for hyperbilirubinaemia 
Goldman SL, Penalver A, and Penaranda R. Jaundice meter: evaluation of new guidelines. Journal of Pediatrics 1982; 101:(2)253–
6. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Gonzaba G. Research corner. End tidal carbon monoxide: a new method to detect hyperbilirubinemia in newborns. Newborn 
and Infant Nursing Reviews 2007; 7:(2)122–8. 
Overview 
Grohmann K, Roser M, Rolinski B et al. Bilirubin measurement for neonates: comparison of 9 frequently used methods. Pediatrics 
2006; 117:(4)1174–83. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Gupta PC, Kumari S, Mullick DN et al. Icterometer: a useful screening tool for neonatal jaundice. Indian Pediatrics 1991; 
28:(5)473–6. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Harish R and Sharma DB. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in neonates: evaluation of Minolta Air shields jaundicemeter. Indian 
Pediatrics 1998; 35:(3)264–7. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Hegyi T, Hiatt IM, and Indyk L. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry. I. Correlations in term infants. Journal of Pediatrics 1981; 
98:(3)454–7. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Ho EY, Lee SY, Chow CB et al.  BiliCheck transcutaneous bilirubinometer: a screening tool for neonatal jaundice in the Chinese 
population. Hong Kong Medical Journal  2006; 12:(2)99–102. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Ho HT, Ng TK, Tsui KC et al. Evaluation of a new transcutaneous bilirubinometer in Chinese newborns. Archives of Disease in 
Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2006; 91:(6)F434-F438. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Jangaard KA, Curtis H, and Goldbloom RB. Estimation of bilirubin using BiliChek[trademark], a transcutaneous bilirubin 
measurement device: Effects of gestational age and use of phototherapy. Paediatrics and Child Health 2006; 11:(2)79–83. 
Data not relevant – overestimation an 
underestimation of tests 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
467 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Janjindamai W and Tansantiwong T. Accuracy of transcutaneous bilirubinometer estimates using BiliCheck in Thai neonates.  
Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 2005; 88:(2)187–90. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Kaplan M, Hammerman C, Feldman R et al. Predischarge bilirubin screening in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase- deficient 
neonates. Pediatrics 2000; 105:(3)533–7. 
Female subjects were included from a 
retrospective studies 
Kaplan M, Shchors I, Algur N et al. Visual screening versus transcutaneous bilirubinometry for predischarge jaundice assessment. 
Acta Paediatrica 2008; 97:(6)759–63. 
Timing of tests not specified 
Kazmierczak S, Bhutani V, Gourley G, Kerr S, Lo S, Robertson A, and Sena SF. Transcutaneous bilirubin testing. Laboratory 
medicine practice guidelines: evidence-based practice for point-of-care testing. Washington DC: National Academy of Clinical 
Biochemistry; 2006. 
Review of transcutaneous bilirubinometers 
Keren, R.; Luan, X.; Tremont, K.; Cnaan, A. Visual Assessment of Jaundice in Term and Late Preterm Infants. Arch. Dis. Child. 
Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2009,  
Test timing was 8 hours 
Knudsen A and Ebbesen F. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in neonatal intensive care units. Archives of Disease in Childhood 
1996; 75:(1 SUPPL.)F53-F56. 
Study not relevant – multiple regression used to 
study different factors 
Knudsen A. Predicting the need for phototherapy in healthy mature neonates using transcutaneous bilirubinometry on the first 
postnatal day. Biology of the Neonate 1995; 68:(6)398–403. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Knudsen A. Prediction of the development of neonatal jaundice by increased umbilical cord blood bilirubin. Acta Paediatrica 
Scandinavica 1989; 78:(2)217–21. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Knudsen A. The cephalocaudal progression of jaundice in newborns in relation to the transfer of bilirubin from plasma to skin. 
Early Human Development 1990; 22:(1)23–8. 
Deals with progression of bilirubin from plasma to 
skin 
Knupfer M, Pulzer F, Braun L et al. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in preterm infants. Acta Paediatrica, International Journal of 
Paediatrics 2001; 90:(8)899–903. 
Transcutaneous measurement in preterm babies 
Kolman KB, Mathieson KM, and Frias C. A comparison of transcutaneous and total serum bilirubin in newborn hispanic infants at 
35 or more weeks of gestation. Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine 2007; #20:(3)266–71. 
Not all babies tested 
Kumar A, Faridi MM, Singh N et al. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in the management of bilirubinemia in term neonates. Indian 
Journal of Medical Research 1994; 99:227–30. 
Unclear of timing of tests 
Lim HH, Daniel LM, Lee J et al. Predicting significant hyperbilirubinaemia and early discharge for glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficient newborns. Annals of the Academy of Medicine Singapore 2003; 32:(2)257–61. 
Coombs’ test only  used if phototherapy was 
indicated 
Linder N, Regev A, Gazit G et al. Noninvasive determination of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia: standardization for variation in skin 
color. American Journal of Perinatology 1994; 11:(3)223–5. 
Timing of tests = 4 hours 
Mahajan G, Kaushal RK, Sankhyan N et al. Transcutaneous bilirubinometer in assessment of neonatal jaundice in northern India. 
Indian Pediatrics 2005; 42:(1)41–5. 
Minolta JM-101 was used – not a transcutaneous 
bilirubinometer of interest 
Maisels MJ and Kring E. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry decreases the need for serum bilirubin measurements and saves money. 
Pediatrics 1997; 99:(4)599–601. 
Health economic analysis of JM-102 
Mercier CE, Barry SE, Paul K et al. Improving newborn preventive services at the birth hospitalization: a collaborative, hospital-
based quality-improvement project. Pediatrics 2007; 120:(3)481–8. 
Quality improvement programme not relevant to 
this guideline 
Namba F and Kitajima H. Utility of a new transcutaneous jaundice device with two optical paths in premature infants. Pediatrics 
International 2007; 49:(4)497–501. 
Poor quality study 

Neonatal jaundice 
468 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Narayanan I, Banwalikar J, Mehta R et al. A simple method of evaluation of jaundice in the newborn. Annals of Tropical 
Paediatrics 1990; 10:(1)31–4. 
Unclear if tests were within 1 hour 
Nasser B and de M. Bilirubin dosage in cord blood: Could it predict neonatal hyperbilirubinemia? Sao Paulo Medical Journal 
2004; 122:(3)99–103. 
Incomplete data 
Orzalesi M, Gloria-Bottini F, Lucarelli P  et al. ABO system incompatibility: evaluation of risk of hyperbilirubinaemia at birth by 
multivariate discriminant analysis. Experientia 1983; 39:(1)89–91. 
Only babies with blood group incompatibility 
were included 
Prasarnphanich T and Somlaw S. The value of routine bilirubin screening to detect significant hyperbilirubinemia in Thai healthy 
term newborns. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 2007; 90:(5)925–30. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Randeberg LL, Roll EB, Nilsen LT et al. In vivo spectroscopy of jaundiced newborn skin reveals more than a bilirubin index. Acta 
Paediatrica 2005; 94:(1)65–71. 
Ways to improve algorithm for transcutaneous 
measurement 
Robertson A, Kazmierczak S, and Vos P. Improved transcutaneous bilirubinometry: comparison of SpectR(X) BiliCheck and 
Minolta Jaundice Meter JM-102 for estimating total serum bilirubin in a normal newborn population. Journal of Perinatology 
2002; 22:(1)12–4. 
Data not extractable 
Rodriguez-Capote K, Kim K, Paes B et al. Clinical implication of the difference between transcutaneous bilirubinometry and total 
serum bilirubin for the classification of newborns at risk of hyperbilirubinemia. Clinical Biochemistry 2009; 42:(3)176–9. 
Nidrect comparison of Minolta JM-103 and 
BiliChek 
Rosenfeld J. Umbilical cord bilirubin levels as a predictor of subsequent hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Family Practice 1986; 
23:(6)556–8. 
Retrospective study 
Rubegni P, Cevenini G, Sbano P et al. Cutaneous colorimetric evaluation of serum concentrations of bilirubin in healthy term 
neonates: a new methodological approach. Skin Research and Technology 2005; 11:(1)70–5. 
Device being tested not relevant to this guideline 
Ruchala PL, Seibold L, and Stremsterfer K. Validating assessment of neonatal jaundice with transcutaneous bilirubin measurement. 
Neonatal Network: The Journal of Neonatal Nursing 1996; 15:(4)33–7. 
Correlation of visual inspection and 
transcutaneous measurement 
Ruskandi M, Garna H, and Alisjahbana A. The use of icterometer in assessing neonatal jaundice. Paediatrica Indonesiana 1978; 
18:(5–6)158–63. 
Not clear if tests were carried out within 2 hours 
Sanpavat S and Nuchprayoon I. Comparison of two transcutaneous bilirubinometers--Minolta AirShields Jaundice Meter JM103 
and Spectrx Bilicheck--in Thai neonates. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public Health 2005; 36:(6)1533–7. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Sanpavat S, Nuchprayoon I, Smathakanee C et al. Nomogram for prediction of the risk of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, using 
transcutaneous bilirubin. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 2005; 88:(9)1187–93. 
No reference test used 
Serrao PA and Modanlou HD. Significance of anti-A and anti-B isohemagglutinins in cord blood of ABO incompatible newborn 
infants: correlation with hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Perinatology 1989; 9:(2)154–8. 
Transcutaneous bilirubin used as the reference test 
Sheridan-Pereira M and Gorman W. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry: An evaluation. Archives of Disease in Childhood 1982; 
57:(9)708–10. 
Unclear of timing of tests 
Smith DW, Inguillo D, Martin D et al. Use of noninvasive tests to predict significant jaundice in full-term infants: preliminary 
studies. Pediatrics 1985; 75:(2)278–80. 
Correspondence 
Stein H, Wolfsdorf J, and Buchanan N. The use of the icterometer in assessing neonatal jaundice. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics 
and Environmental Child Health 1975; 21:(2)67–8. 
Unclear of timing of tests 
Stepensky P, Revel-Vilk S, Weintraub M et al. Combination of umbilical cord blood with BM from a 2-month-old sibling as 
lifesaving BMT for very severe aplastic anemia. Bone Marrow Transplantation 2008; 42:(8)563–4. 
Correspondence 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
469 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Surjono A, Triasih R, and Haksari EL. The first 24 hours bilirubin level as a predictor of hyperbilirubinemia in healthy term 
newborns. Perinatology 2003; 5:(4)159–66. 
Incomplete data  
Taha SA, Karrar ZA, and Dost SM. Transcutaneous bilirubin measurement in evaluating neonatal jaundice among Saudi 
newborns. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics 1984; 4:(4)229–31. 
Duplicate publication 
Tan KL and Dong F. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry during and after phototherapy. Acta Paediatrica, International Journal of 
Paediatrics 2003; 92:(3)327–31. 
Use of transcutaneous bilirubinometer during and 
after phototherapy 
Tan KL, Chia HP, and Koh BC. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in Chinese, Malay and Indian infants. Acta Paediatrica, 
International Journal of Paediatrics 1996; 85:(8)986–90. 
Incomplete data – data not available for 262 
babies 
Tan KL. Neonatal jaundice in 'healthy' very low birthweight infants. Australian Paediatric Journal 1987; 23:(3)185–8. No comparison goup 
Tan KL. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in Chinese and Malay neonates. Annals of the Academy of Medicine Singapore 1985; 
14:(4)591–4. 
Some babies had been exposed to phototherapy 
Venkataseshan S, Murki S, and Kumar P. Non-invasive bilirubinometry in neonates. Perinatology 2004; 6:(6)315–9. Commentary 
Wainer S, Bolton KD, Cooper PA et al. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in black infants: Improved reliability after correction for 
the background signal. Pediatric Reviews and Communications 1989; 4:(1–2)93–2. 
Importance of background signal in 
transcutaneous bilirubin measurements 
Wainer S, Rabi J, Lyon M et al. Coombs' testing and neonatal hyperbilirubinemia... Sgro M, Campbell D, Shah V. Incidence and 
causes of severe hyperbilirubinemia in Canada. CMAJ 2006;175(6):587–90. CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal 2007; 
176:(7)972–3, 976. 
Correspondence 
Webster J, Blyth R, and Nugent F. An appraisal of the use of the Kramer's scale in predicting hyperbilirubinaemia in healthy full 
term infants. Birth Issues 2005; 14:(3)83–9. 
Data not extractable 
Willems WA, Von D, De W et al. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry with the Bilicheck in very premature newborns. Journal of 
Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine 2004; 16:(4)-Fetal. 
Data not relevant 
Wong CM, Van Dijk P, and Laing IA. A comparison of transcutaneous bilirubinometers: SpectRx BiliCheck versus Minolta 
AirShields. Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2002; 87:(2)F137-F140. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Wong V, Chen WX, and Wong KY. Short- and long-term outcome of severe neonatal nonhemolytic hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of 
Child Neurology 2006; 21:(4)309–15. 
Outcomes of severe  hyperbilirubinaemia 
Yamauchi Y and Yamanouchi I. Clinical application of transcutaneous bilirubin measurement. Early prediction of 
hyperbilirubinemia. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1990; 79:(4)385–90. 
Poor quality study – EL 3 
Yamauchi Y and Yamanouchi I. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry in normal Japanese infants. Acta Paediatrica Japonica (Overseas 
Edition) 1989; 31:(Overseas Edition)65–72. 
Time between compared tests greater than 1 hour 
Yamauchi Y and Yamanouchi I. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry: serum bilirubin measurement using transcutaneous 
bilirubinometer (TcB). A preliminary study. Biology of the Neonate 1989; 56:(5)257–62. 
Test of different curvettes for Minolta JM 
Yap SH, Mohammad I, and Ryan CA. Avoiding painful blood sampling in neonates by transcutaneous bilirubinometry. Irish 
Journal of Medical Science 2002; 171:(4)188–90. 
Unclear of time between testing 
Yasuda S, Itoh S, Isobe K et al. New transcutaneous jaundice device with two optical paths. Journal of Perinatal Medicine 2003; 
31:(1)81–8. 
No possible to extract data 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
470 
What should be included in a formal assessment of a baby with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia?  
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Abolghasemi H, Mehrani H, and Amid A. An update on the prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and 
neonatal jaundice in Tehran neonates. Clinical Biochemistry 2004; 37:(3)241–4. 
Babies were only tested for G6PD  
Adachi Y, Katoh H, Fuchi I et al. Serum bilirubin fractions in healthy subjects and patients with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. 
Clinical Biochemistry 1990; 23:(3)247–51. 
Diagnostic criteria not specified 
Ahlfors CE and Parker AE. Evaluation of a model for brain bilirubin uptake in jaundiced newborns. Pediatric Research 2005; 
58:(6)1175–9. 
Modelling study 
Ahlfors CE and Parker AE. Unbound bilirubin concentration is associated with abnormal automated auditory brainstem response 
for jaundiced newborns. Pediatrics 2008; 121:(5)976–8. 
Test not relevant to this guideline - value of 
Auditory brainstem response as a predictor of 
kernicterus 
Ahlfors CE and Wennberg RP. Bilirubin-albumin binding and neonatal jaundice. Seminars in Perinatology 2004; 28:(5)334–9. Commentary 
Ahlfors CE, Amin SB, and Parker AE. Unbound bilirubin predicts abnormal automated auditory brainstem response in a diverse 
newborn population. Journal of Perinatology 2009; 29:(4)305–9. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Ahlfors CE. Bilirubin-albumin binding and free bilirubin. Journal of Perinatology 2001; 21:(SUPPL. 1)S40-S42. Commentary 
Ahlfors CE. Criteria for exchange transfusion in jaundiced newborns. Pediatrics 1994; 93:(3)488–94. Using the bilirubin/albumin ratio and indicator for 
exchange transfusion 
Ahlfors CE. Measurement of plasma unbound unconjugated bilirubin. Analytical Biochemistry 2000; 279:(2)130–5. Comparison of different methods for measuring 
conjugated bilirubin 
Ahlfors CE. Unbound bilirubin associated with kernicterus: a historical approach. Journal of Pediatrics 2000; 137:(4)540–4. Theoretic analysis of laboratory data 
Ahmadi AH and Ghazizadeh Z. Evaluation of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency without hemolysis in icteric 
newborns at Mazandaran province, Iran. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences 2008; 11:(10)1394–7. 
Physiological jaundice was excluded 
Ahmed P and Ahmad KN. Screening of the newborns for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Indian Pediatrics 1983; 
20:(5)351–5. 
Babies with ABO or Rh incompatibility were 
excluded 
Akman I, Ozek E, Kulekci S et al. Auditory neuropathy in hyperbilirubinemia: is there a correlation between serum bilirubin, 
neuron-specific enolase levels and auditory neuropathy? International Journal of Audiology 2004; 43:(9)516–22. 
Babies with haemolysis were excluded 
Al-Dabbous IA, Owa JA, and Al-Khater NS. Neonatal jaundice in Qatif: The role of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency in the etiology among outpatient cases. Annals of Saudi Medicine  1995; 15:(5)539–41. 
No entry level criteria for jaundice were used 
Alden ER, Lynch SR, and Wennberg RP. Carboxyhemoglobin determination in evaluating neonatal jaundice. American Journal of 
Diseases of Children 1974; 127:(2)214–7. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Al-Magamci MSF, Khan A, Bhat BA et al. Neonatal jaundice: An etiological survey in the Madinah region. Annals of Saudi 
Medicine 1996; 16:(2)221–3. 
Subjects with physiological jaundice were 
excluded 
Al-Naama LM, Al-Sadoon IA, and Al-Naama MM. Neonatal jaundice and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in 
Basrah.  Annals of Tropical Paediatrics 1987; 7:(2)134–8. 
Babies were not tested for blood group 
incompatibility 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
471 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
AlOtaibi SF, Blaser S, and MacGregor DL. Neurological complications of kernicterus. Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences 
2005; 32:(3)311–5. 
Unclear if blood group incompatibility was tested 
for 
Amin SB, Ahlfors C, Orlando MS et al. Bilirubin and serial auditory brainstem responses in premature infants. Pediatrics 2001; 
107:(4)664–70. 
Data from this study was contained in an included 
review 
Amin SB. Clinical assessment of bilirubin-induced neurotoxicity in premature infants. Seminars in Perinatology  2004; 28:(5)340–
7. 
Overview 
Arias IM, Gartner LM, Seifter S et al. Prolonged neonatal unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia associated with breast feeding and a 
steroid, Pregnane-3(Alpha), 20(beta)-diol, in maternal milk that inhibits glucuronide formation in vitro.  Journal of Clinical 
Investigation 1964; 43:2037–47. 
Test for different factors in human breast milk 
Azubuike JC. Neonatal jaundice in Eastern Nigeria. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics 1985; 31:(2)82–4. Duplicate of Azubuike 1979 
Bahl L, Sharma R, and Sharma J. Etiology of neonatal jaundice at Shimla. Indian Pediatrics 1994; 31:(10)1275–8. Uncertainty over criteria for jaundice or 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Ballowitz L. Bilirubin encephalopathy: changing concepts. Brain and Development 1980; 2:(3)219–27. Overview 
Basu K, Das PK, Bhattacharya R et al. A new look on neonatal jaundice. Journal of the Indian Medical Association 2003; 
100:(9)556–60. 
Single test only 
Beachy JM. Lab values. Investigating jaundice in the newborn. Neonatal Network: The Journal of Neonatal Nursing 2007; 
26:(5)327-?? 
Overview 
Behjati-Ardakani S, Nikkhah A, and Sedaghat M. The association between G6PD deficiency and total serum bilirubin level in 
icteric neonates. Acta Medica Iranica 2007; 45:(3)233–5. 
Only tested for G6PD deficiency 
Behjati-Ardakani S, Nikkhah A, Ashrafi MR et al. Association between total serum bilirubin level and manifestations of 
kernicterus. Acta Medica Iranica 2006; 44:(6)405–8. 
Data on ABO/Rh incompatibility was not reported 
Bender GJ, Cashore WJ, and Oh W. Ontogeny of bilirubin-binding capacity and the effect of clinical status in premature infants 
born at less than 1300 grams. Pediatrics 2007; 120:(5)1067–73. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Bernstein J, Braylan R, and Brough AJ. Bile-plug syndrome: a correctable cause of obstructive jaundice in infants. Pediatrics 1969; 
43:(2)273–6. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Bertini G, Dani C, Pezzati M et al. Prevention of bilirubin encephalopathy. Biology of the Neonate 2001; 79:(3–4)219–4. Overview 
Bhutia RD, Upadhyay B, and Maneesh M. Association of plasma level of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances with extent of 
hepatocellular injury in preterm infants with cholestatic jaundice. Indian Journal of Clinical Biochemistry 2006; 21:(2)39–41. 
Test was for Cholestasis 
Bilgen H, Ozek E, Unver T et al. Urinary tract infection and hyperbilirubinemia. Turkish Journal of Pediatrics 2006; 48:(1)51–5. Jaundice as a predictor for Urinary Tract Infections 
Bilgen H. Urinary tract infection and neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Turkish Journal of Pediatrics 2007; 49:(1)114. Correspondence 
Bonillo-Perales A, Munoz-Hoyos A, Martinez-Morales A et al. Changes in erythrocytic deformability and plasma viscosity in 
neonatal ictericia. American Journal of Perinatology 1999; 16:(8)421–7. 
Comparison of babies with jaundice and without 
jaundice 
Borgard JP, Szymanowicz A, Pellae I et al. Determination of total bilirubin in whole blood from neonates: results from a French 
multicenter study. Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine 2006; 44:(9)1103–10. 
Comparison of different methods of bilirubin 
analysis 
Botha MC, Rees J, Pritchard J et al. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and neonatal jaundice among population 
groups of Cape Town. South African Medical Journal 1967; 41:(8)174–80. 
Single test only 

Neonatal jaundice 
472 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Bracci R, Buonocore G, Garosi G et al. Epidemiologic study of neonatal jaundice. A survey of contributing factors. Acta 
Paediatrica Scandinavica, Supplement 1989; 78:(360)87–92. 
Not all babies were jaundiced 
Bratlid D and Winsnes A. Comparison between different methods for determination of bile pigments in icteric serum samples. 
Scandinavian Journal of Clinical and Laboratory Investigation 1973; 31:(2)231–6. 
Comparison of different methods of measuring 
bile acids 
Bratlid D. Bilirubin toxicity: Pathophysiology and assessment of risk factors. New York State Journal of Medicine 1991; 
91:(11)489–92. 
Overview 
Bratlid D. Reserve albumin binding capacity, salicylate saturation index, and red cell binding of bilirubin in neonatal jaundice. 
Archives of Disease in Childhood 1973; 48:(5)393–7. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Brito MA, Silva R, Tiribelli C et al. Assessment of bilirubin toxicity to erythrocytes. Implication in neonatal jaundice management. 
European Journal of Clinical Investigation 2000; 30:(3)239–47. 
Laboratory analysis of bilirubin toxicity on serum 
samples 
Brito MA, Silva RFM, and Brites D. Bilirubin toxicity to human erythrocytes: A review. Clinica Chimica Acta  2006; 374:(1–2)46–
2. 
Overview 
Brown AK. Hyperbilirubinemia in black infants. Role of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Clinical Pediatrics 1992; 
31:(12)712–5. 
Overview 
Brown WR and Boon WH. Hyperbilirubinemia and kernicterus in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficient infants in 
Singapore. Pediatrics 1968; 41:(6)1055–62. 
Study examine incidence of jaundice in G6PD 
Buonocore G, Berti D, Cito G et al. Moderately increased hemolysis in newborn infants with hyperbilirubinemia of unknown 
etiology. Biology of the Neonate 1983; 44:(4)251–6. 
Results of G6PD tests not reported 
Casado A, Casado C, Lopez-Fernandez E et al. Enzyme deficiencies in neonates with jaundice. Panminerva Medica 1995; 
37:(4)175–7. 
Babies were not tested for blood group 
incompatibility 
Cashore WJ and Oh W. Unbound bilirubin and kernicterus in low-birth-weight infants. Pediatrics 1982; 69:(4)481–5. Autopsy study on link between unbound bilirubin 
and kernicterus in low-birthweight babies 
Cashore WJ, Oh W, Blumberg WE et al. Rapid fluorometric assay of bilirubin and bilirubin binding capacity in blood of jaundiced 
neonates: comparisons with other methods. Pediatrics 1980; 66:(3)411–6. 
Laboratory evaluation of a new method for 
measuring bilirubin binding capacity 
Chen SH, Chen LY, and Chen JS. Carboxyhemoglobin and serum hepatic enzymes in newborns with hyperbilirubinemia. Taiwan 
i Hsueh Hui Tsa Chih - Journal of the Formosan Medical Association 1986; 85:(2)101–8. 
Babies with G6PD deficiency or blood group 
incompatibility were excluded 
Chen SH. Endogenous formation of carbon monoxide in Chinese newborn with hyperbilirubinemia. Taiwan i Hsueh Hui Tsa 
Chih - Journal of the Formosan Medical Association 1981; 80:(1)68–77. 
No test for G6PD deficiency 
Chen WX, Wong VCN, and Wong KY. Neurodevelopmental outcome of severe neonatal hemolytic hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of 
Child Neurology 2006; 21:(6)474–9. 
Babies with sepsis were excluded 
Cisowska A, Tichaczek-Goska D, Szozda A et al. The bactericidal activity of complement in sera of children with infectious 
hyperbilirubinemia. Advances in Clinical and Experimental Medicine 2007; 16:(5)629–34. 
Evaluation of bactericidal activity in blood – not 
relevant to this guideline 
Coban AC, Can G, Kadioglu A et al. Adrenal hemorrhage: A rare cause of severe neonatal jaundice. Pediatric Surgery 
International 1994; 9:(1–2)123-?? 
Case study 
Corchia C, Sanna MC, Serra C et al. 'Idiopathic' jaundice in Sardinian full-term newborn infants: a multivariate study. Paediatric 
and Perinatal Epidemiology 1993; 7:(1)55–66. 
Babies with ABO/Rh incompatibility were 
excluded 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
473 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Dani C, Martelli E, Bertini G et al. Plasma bilirubin level and oxidative stress in preterm infants. Archives of Disease in Childhood 
Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2003; 88:(2)F119-F123. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Deshmukh VV and Sharma KD. Deficiency of erythrocyte G-6-PD as a cause of neonatal jaundice in India. Indian Pediatrics 
1968; 5:(9)401–5. 
Three case studies 
Doxiadis SA, Karaklis A, Valaes T et al. Risk of severe jaundice in Glucose-6-Phosphate-Dehydrogenase deficiency of the 
newborn. Differences in population groups. Lancet 1964; 2:(7371)1210–2. 
Not all babies tested for ABO incompatibility 
Ebbesen F, Andersson C, Verder H et al. Extreme hyperbilirubinaemia in term and near-term infants in Denmark. Acta Paediatrica 
2005; 94:(1)59–64. 
Babies not tested for G6PD 
Ebbesen F. Recurrence of kernicterus in term and near-term infants in Denmark. Acta Paediatrica, International Journal of 
Paediatrics 2000; 89:(10)1213–7. 
Cases were not tested for G6PD deficiency 
Emamghorashi F, Zendegani N, Rabiee S et al. Evaluation of urinary tract infection in newborns with jaundice in south of Iran. 
Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences 2008; 33:(1)17–21. 
Jaundice as a predictor of UTI 
Esbjorner E, Larsson P, Leissner P et al. The serum reserve albumin concentration for monoacetyldiaminodiphenyl sulphone and 
auditory evoked responses during neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1991; 80:(4)406–12. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Esbjorner E. Albumin binding properties in relation to bilirubin and albumin concentrations during the first week of life. Acta 
Paediatrica Scandinavica 1991; 80:(4)400–5. 
Incomplete data 
Eshaghpour E, Oski FA, and Williams M. The relationship of erythrocyte glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency to 
byperbilirubinemia in Negro premature infants. Journal of Pediatrics 1967; 70:(4)595–601. 
Study on the impact of G6PD on exchange 
transfusion levels 
Eslami Z and Sheikhha MH. Investigation of urinary tract infection in neonates with hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Medical 
Sciences 2007; 7:(5)909–12. 
Jaundice as a predictor for Urinary Tract Infections 
Etzioni A, Shoshani G, Diamond E et al. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia in hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, an enigma. 
Zeitschrift fur Kinderchirurgie 1986; 41:(5)272–4. 
Not all subjects had jaundice 
Fakhraee SH, Haji-Ebrahim-Tehrani F, Amid MH et al. Results of urine and blood cultures in healthy jaundiced newborns: Making 
the correct choice. Archives of Iranian Medicine 2002; 5:(2)88–90. 
Tests for incidence of infections in babies with 
jaundice 
Falcao AS, Fernandes A, Brito MA et al. Bilirubin-induced inflammatory response, glutamate release, and cell death in rat cortical 
astrocytes are enhanced in younger cells. Neurobiology of Disease 2005; 20:(2)199–206. 
Animal test 
Feld LG, Langford DJ, and Schwartz GJ. The effect of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia on the measurement of plasma creatinine. 
Clinical Pediatrics 1984; 23:(3)154–6. 
Study on effect of jaundice on plasma creatinine 
Feng CS, Wan CP, Lau J et al.  Incidence of ABO haemolytic disease of the newborn in a group of Hong Kong babies with severe 
neonatal jaundice. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 1990; 26:(3)155–7. 
Babies were only tested for ABO incompatibility 
Finni K, Simila S, Koivisto M et al. Cholic acid, chenodeoxycholic acid, alpha-1-fetoprotein and alpha-1-antitrypsin serum 
concentrations in breast-fed infants with prolonged jaundice. European Journal of Pediatrics 1982; 138:(1)53–5. 
Study for a single syndrome in prolonged jaundice 
Finni K, Simila S, Koivisto M et al. Serum cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid concentrations in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. 
Biology of the Neonate 1981; 40:(5–6)264–8. 
Study for a single syndrome in prolonged jaundice 
Fok TF, Lau SP, and Hui CW. Neonatal jaundice: its prevalence in Chinese babies and associating factors. Australian Paediatric 
Journal 1986; 22:(3)215–9. 
Babies born by caesarean section were excluded 

Neonatal jaundice 
474 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Francauai J, Myara A, Benattar C et al. Investigation of total and conjugated bilirubin determination during the neonatal period. 
European Journal of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Biochemistry 1993; 31:(8)499–502. 
Not all subjects had jaundice 
Fretzayas A, Kitsiou S, Tsezou A et al. UGT1A1 promoter polymorphism as a predisposing factor of hyperbilirubinaemia in 
neonates with acute pyelonephritis. Scandinavian Journal of Infectious Diseases 2006; 38:(6–7)537. 
Case studies 
Funato M, Tamai H, Shimada S et al. Vigintiphobia, unbound bilirubin, and auditory brainstem responses. Pediatrics 1994; 
93:(1)50–3. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Furuhjelm U, Nevanlinna HR, and Osterlund K. Early neonatal jaundice and hyperbilirubinaemia and their relation to ABO 
incompatibility. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1967; 56:(5)477–84. 
Babies with Rh incompatibility were excluded 
Garbagnati E and Manitto P. A new class of bilirubin photoderivatives obtained in vitro and their possible formation in jaundiced 
infants. Journal of Pediatrics 1973; 83:(1)109–15. 
Study of laboratory processes 
Garcia FJ and Nager AL. Jaundice as an early diagnostic sign of urinary tract infection in infancy. Pediatrics 2002; 109:(5)846–51. Jaundice as a predictor of UTI 
Ghaemi S, Fesharaki RJ, and Kelishadi R. Late onset jaundice and urinary tract infection in neonates. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 
2007; 74:(2)139–41. 
Rates of urinary tract infections in late-onset 
jaundice 
Gibbs WN, Gray R, and Lowry M. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and neonatal jaundice in Jamaica. British 
Journal of Haematology 1979; 43:(2)263–74. 
Babies with biliary obstruction were excluded 
Gloria-Bottini F, Orzalesi M, Coccia M et al. Neonatal jaundice in ABO incompatible infants. Computer-assisted evaluation of risk 
of hyperbilirubinaemia and analysis of differences between sexes. Computers and Biomedical Research 1981; 14:(1)31–40. 
Not tested for G6PD deficiency 
Go JMR, Cocjin A, and Dee-Chan R. Jaundice as an early diagnostic sign of urinary tract infection in infants less than 8 weeks of 
age. Santo Tomas Journal of Medicine 2005; 52:(4)131–9. 
Jaundice as a predictor of UTI 
Goldberg PK, Kozinn PJ, Kodsi B et al. Endotoxemia and hyperbilirubinemia in the neonate. American Journal of Diseases of 
Children 1982; 136:(9)845–8. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Gotlieb A, Nir I, and Pesach J. Urinary excretion of free and conjugated glucuronic acid in jaundiced newborn. Acta Paediatrica 
Scandinavica 1971; 60:(4)437–40. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Haimi-Cohen Y, Merlob P, Davidovitz M et al. Renal function in full-term neonates with hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of 
Perinatology 1997; 17:(3)225–7. 
Effect of hyperbilirubinaemia on renal function 
Hanka¸ E. Unbound bilirubin and risk assessment in the jaundiced newborn: possibilities and limitations. Pediatrics 2006; 
117:(2)526–7. 
Commentary 
Hanko E. Unbound bilirubin and risk assessment in the jaundiced newborn: possibilities and limitations. Pediatrics 2006; 
117:(2)526–7. 
Commentary 
Hargrove MD, Jr. and Van Sanders C. Extreme elevation in total serum bilirubin: a study of the causes in 32 consecutive cases. 
Southern Medical Journal 1971; 64:(2)213–7. 
Subjects were adults with jaundice 
Hawkins B. Immuno-serological studies of neonatal jaundice. Journal of the Singapore Paediatric Society 1972; 14:(2)101–6. Babies were not tested for G6PD 
Henriksen NT, Drablos PA, and Aagenaes O. Cholestatic jaundice in infancy. The importance of familial and genetic factors in 
aetiology and prognosis. Archives of Disease in Childhood 1981; 56:(8)622–7. 
Examination of cholestatic jaundice 
Herschel M, Karrison T, Wen M et al. Isoimmunization is unlikely to be the cause of hemolysis in ABO-incompatible but direct 
antiglobulin test-negative neonates. Pediatrics 2002; 110:(1 I)127–30. 
Not all babies were not jaundiced 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
475 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Hitch DC, Leonard JC, Pysher TJ et al. Differentiation of cholestatic jaundice in infants. Utility of diethyl-IDA. American Journal of 
Surgery 1981; 142:(6)671–7. 
Diagnosis of biliary atresia 
Hon AT, Balakrishnan S, and Ahmad Z. Hyperbilirubinaemia and erythrocytic glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in 
Malaysian children. Medical Journal of Malaysia 1989; 44:(1)30–4. 
Only babies with G6PD deficiency tested 
Howorth PJ. Determination of serum albumin in neonatal jaundice. The albumin saturation index. Clinica Chimica Acta 1971; 
32:(2)271–8. 
Comparison of two methods to measure serum 
albumin 
Huang A, Tai BC, Wong LY et al. Differential risk for early breastfeeding jaundice in a multi-ethnic asian cohort. Annals of the 
Academy of Medicine Singapore 2009; 38:(3)217–24. 
Babies less than 2500 g were excluded 
Husain S and Pohowalla JN. Serum iron levels in jaundice in infancy and childhood. Journal of the Indian Medical Association 
1969; 53:(5)237–40. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Hwang KC, Hsieh KH, and Chen JH. Immunological studies of newborn infants with hyperbilirubinemia. Chinese Journal of 
Microbiology and Immunology 1981; 14:(2)1–7. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Jalloh S, Van RH, Yusoff NM et al. Poor correlation between hemolysis and jaundice in glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase-
deficient babies. Pediatrics International 2005; 47:(3)258–61. 
Incomplete data – number with blood group 
incompatibility were not reported 
Jangaard KA, Fell DB, Dodds L et al. Outcomes in a population of healthy term and near-term infants with serum bilirubin levels 
of >or=325 micromol/L (>or=19 mg/dL) who were born in Nova Scotia, Canada, between 1994 and 2000. Pediatrics 2008; 
122:(1)119–24. 
Adverse effects of severe hyperbilirubinaemia 
Javitt NB. Hyperbilirubinemic and cholestatic syndromes. New concepts aiding recognition and management. Postgraduate 
Medicine 1979; 65:(1)120–4. 
Overview 
Kaapa P. Immunoreactive thromboxane B2 and 6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Prostaglandins 
Leukotrienes and Medicine 1985; 17:(1)97–105. 
Only babies with idiopathic jaundice were 
included 
Kaini NR, Chaudhary D, Adhikary V et al. Overview of cases and prevalence of jaundice in neonatal intensive care unit. Nepal 
Medical College Journal: NMCJ 2006; 8:(2)133–5. 
Not test for G6PD deficiency 
Kaplan M and Hammerman C. Understanding severe hyperbilirubinemia and preventing kernicterus: adjuncts in the interpretation 
of neonatal serum bilirubin. Clinica Chimica Acta 2005; 356:(1–2)9–21. 
Overview 
Kaplan M, Algur N, and Hammerman C. Onset of jaundice in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficient neonates. Pediatrics 
2001; 108:(4)956–9. 
Babies with blood group incompatibility were 
excluded 
Kaplan M, Beutler E, Vreman HJ et al. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficient 
heterozygotes. Pediatrics 1999; 104:(1 Pt 1)68–74. 
Babies with a positive Coombs’ text were 
excluded 
Kaplan M, Rubaltelli FF, Hammerman C et al. Conjugated bilirubin in neonates with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency. Journal of Pediatrics 1996; 128:(5 I)695–7. 
Only babies with G6PD deficiency tested 
Kavukcu S, Turkmen M, Polat M et al. Urinary enzyme changes in newborns with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Acta 
Paediatrica Japonica 1997; 39:(Overseas Edition)-204. 
Effect of hyperbilirubinaemia on renal function 
Kedar PS, Warang P, Colah RB et al. Red cell pyruvate kinase deficiency in neonatal jaundice cases in India. Indian Journal of 
Pediatrics 2006; 73:(11)985–8. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
 Keenan WJ, Arnold JE, and Sutherland JM. Serum bilirubin binding determined by sephadex column chromatography. Journal of 
Pediatrics 1969; 74:(5)813. 
Conference abstract 

Neonatal jaundice 
476 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Kilic M, Turgut M, Taskin E et al. Nitric oxide levels and antioxidant enzyme activities in jaundices of premature infants. Cell 
Biochemistry and Function 2004; 22:(5)339–42. 
Babies with ABO or Rh incompatibility were 
excluded 
Kirk JM. Neonatal jaundice: a critical review of the role and practice of bilirubin analysis. Annals of Clinical Biochemistry 2008; 
45:(Pt 5)452–62. 
Overview 
Knudsen A. The influence of the reserve albumin concentration and pH on the cephalocaudal progression of jaundice in 
newborns. Early Human Development 1991; 25:(1)37–41. 
Babies were not pre-selected for jaundice 
Kulkarni SV, Merchant RH, Gupte SC et al. Clinical significance of serum and cerebro spinal fluid bilirubin indices in neonatal 
jaundice. Indian Pediatrics 1989; 26:(12)1202–8. 
Test (cerebro-spinal fluid bilirubin) not relevant to 
this guideline 
Kumar A, Pant P, Basu S et al. Oxidative stress in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics 2007; 53:(1)69–71. Test not relevant to this guideline 
Kumral A, Genc S, Genc K et al. Hyperbilirubinemic serum is cytotoxic and induces apoptosis in murine astrocytes. Biology of the 
Neonate 2005; 87:(2)99–104. 
Study examining the effect of hyperbilirubinaemic 
serum on murine astrocytees 
Lai HC, Lai MP, and Leung KS. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in Chinese. Journal of Clinical Pathology 1968; 
21:(1)44–7. 
Only tested for G6PD 
Lee HC, Fang SB, Yeung CY et al. Urinary tract infections in infants: comparison between those with conjugated vs unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics 2005; 25:(4)277–82. 
Comparison of urinary tract infection rates in 
conjugated and unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Lee KS and Gartner LM. Management of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn. Seminars in Liver Disease 1983; 
3:(1)52–64. 
Overview 
Lee WS, McKiernan PJ, Beath SV et al. Bile bilirubin pigment analysis in disorders of bilirubin metabolism in early infancy. 
Archives of Disease in Childhood 2001; 85:(1)38–42. 
Study for a single syndrome in prolonged jaundice 
Leung AK. Screening of jaundiced neonates for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Southern Medical Journal 1987; 
80:(2)217–8. 
Babies were not tested for blood group 
incompatibility 
Lie-Injo LE, Virik HK, Lim PW et al. Red cell metabolism and severe neonatal jaundice in West Malaysia. Acta Haematologica 
1977; 58:(3)152–60. 
Babies with isoimmunisation were excluded 
Lin M, Shieh SH, Hwang FY et al. The Le(a) antigen and neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in Taiwan. Vox Sanguinis 1995; 69:(2)131–
4. 
Babies with blood group incompatibility or G6PD 
were excluded 
Linder N, Yatsiv I, Tsur M et al. Unexplained neonatal jaundice as an early diagnostic sign of septicemia in the newborn. Journal 
of Perinatology 1988; 8:(4)325–7. 
Test not relevant to guideline 
MacKinlay GA. Jaundice persisting beyond 14 days after birth. British Medical Journal 1993; 306:(6890)1426–7. Overview 
Madan N and Sood SK. Role of G6PD, ABO incompatibility, low birth weight and infection in neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Tropical and Geographical Medicine 1987; 39:(2)163–8. 
Babies with Rh incompatibility were excluded 
Madan N, Sundaram KR, Bhargava SK et al. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Indian Journal of Medical Research 1989; 90:306–13. 
Babies were not tested for blood group 
incompatibility 
Maisels MJ and Kring E. Risk of sepsis in newborns with severe hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics 1992; 90:(5)741–3. Babies were not tested for G6PD deficiency 
Maisels MJ, Newman TB, Garcia FJ et al. Neonatal Jaundice and Urinary Tract Infections. Pediatrics 2003; 112:(5)1213–4. Correspondence 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
477 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Martin TC, Shea M, Alexander D et al. Did exclusive breast-feeding and early discharge lead to excessive bilirubin levels in 
newborns in Antigua and Barbuda? West Indian Medical Journal 2002; 51:(2)84–8. 
Babies were not tested for G6PD 
Maruo Y, Nishizawa K, Sato H et al. Association of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia with bilirubin UDP- glucuronosyltransferase 
polymorphism. Pediatrics 1999; 103:(6 I)1224–7. 
Genetic test not relevant to this guideline 
Maruo Y, Nishizawa K, Sato H et al. Prolonged unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia associated with breast milk and mutations of the 
bilirubin uridine diphosphate- glucuronosyltransferase gene. Pediatrics 2000; 106:(5)E59. 
A single genetic test 
Marwaha N, Sarode R, Marwaha RK et al. Bilirubin crystals in peripheral blood smears from neonates with unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Medical Laboratory Sciences 1990; 47:(4)278–81. 
Test already routinely done 
McClean P. Recognizing liver disease in jaundiced infants. British Journal of Midwifery 2008; 16:(2)106–9. Overview 
McCulloch JC. Red cell potassium levels in neonatal jaundice --a preliminary study. Medical Laboratory Sciences 1977; 
34:(2)115–22. 
Not tested for blood group incompatibility 
McDonagh AF. Ex uno plures: The concealed complexity of bilirubin species in neonatal blood samples. Pediatrics 2006; 
118:(3)1185–7. 
Review 
McKiernan PJ. Neonatal cholestasis. Seminars in Neonatology 2002; 7:(2)153–65. Overview 
McKiernan PJ. The infant with prolonged jaundice: Investigation and management. Current Paediatrics 2001; 11:(2)83–9. Overview 
Meisel P, Jahrig D, Beyersdorff E et al. Bilirubin binding and acid-base equilibrium in newborn infants with low birthweight. Acta 
Paediatrica Scandinavica 1988; 77:(4)496–501. 
Effect of acid-base on bilirubin-albumin binding 
Meyers RL, Book LS, O'Gorman MA et al. Percutaneous Cholecysto-Cholangiography in the Diagnosis of Obstructive Jaundice in 
Infants. Journal of Pediatric Surgery 2004; 39:(1)16–8. 
Tests not relevant to this quideline 
Monaghan G, McLellan A, McGeehan A et al. Gilbert's syndrome is a contributory factor in prolonged unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia of the newborn. Journal of Pediatrics 1999; 134:(4)441–6. 
Test for a single syndrome in prolonged jaundice 
Moyer V, Freese DK, Whitington PF et al. Guideline for the evaluation of cholestatic jaundice in infants: recommendations of the 
North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and 
Nutrition 2004; 39:(2)115–28. 
Guideline for Cholestatic jaundice 
Muslu N, Dogruer ZN, Eskandari G et al. Are glutathione S-transferase gene polymorphisms linked to neonatal jaundice? 
European Journal of Pediatrics 2008; 167:(1)57–61. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Muslu N, Turhan AB, Eskandari G et al. The frequency of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1 A1 promoter region (TA)7 
polymorphism in newborns and it's relation with jaundice. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics 2007; 53:(1)64–8. 
Correspondence 
Nair RR, Murty JS, Rao MN et al. ABO incompatibility and neonatal jaundice. Indian Journal of Medical Research 1980; 71:567–
75. 
Babies were not tested for G6PD 
Nakamura H, Lee Y, and Takemoto H. Effects of photo-irradiation on bilirubin binding affinity of icteric sera. Kobe Journal of 
Medical Sciences 1981; 27:(2)59–69. 
Effects of phototherapy on total and unbound 
bilirubin  
Nakamura H, Takada S, Shimabuku R et al. Auditory nerve and brainstem responses in newborn infants with hyperbilirubinemia. 
Pediatrics 1985; 75:(4)703–8. 
Study of auditory brainstem responses 
Nakamura H, Yonetani M, Uetani Y et al. Determination of serum unbound bilirubin for prediction of kernicterus in low 
birthweight infants. Acta Paediatrica Japonica 1992; 34:(6)642–7. 
Predictive accuracy of two bilirubin levels for 
predicting kernicterus 

Neonatal jaundice 
478 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Nelson BT. Jaundice survey: Grenada, West Indies. International Pediatrics 1998; 13:(3)150–4. Only 1 in 4 babies were tested for G6PD 
Newman TB and Easterling MJ. Yield of reticulocyte counts and blood smears in term infants. Clinical Pediatrics 1994; 33:(2)71–
6. 
No tests for G6PD 
Newman TB and Maisels MJ. Evaluation and treatment of jaundice in the term newborn: a kinder, gentler approach. Pediatrics 
1992; 89:(5 Pt 1)809–18. 
Overview 
Newman TB, Liljestrand P, and Escobar GJ. Infants with bilirubin levels of 30 mg/dL or more in a large managed care 
organization. Pediatrics 2003; 111:(6 I)1303–11. 
G6PD test not carried out on all babies 
Newman TB, Liljestrand P, Jeremy RJ et al. Outcomes among newborns with total serum bilirubin levels of 25 mg per deciliter or 
more. New England Journal of Medicine 2006; 354:(18)1889–900. 
Not all babies tested 
Nong SH, Xie YM, Chan KW et al. Severe hyperbilirubinaemia in a Chinese girl with type I Crigler-Najjar syndrome: First case 
ever reported in Mainland China. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 2005; 41:(5–6)300–6. 
Case study 
Nowicki MJ and Poley JR. The hereditary hyperbilirubinaemias. Bailliere's Clinical Gastroenterology 1998; 12:(2)355–67. Overview 
Odell GB, Cohen SN, and Kelly PC. Studies in kernicterus. II. The determination of the saturation of serum albumin with bilirubin. 
Journal of Pediatrics 1969; 74:(2)214–30. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Odell GB, Storey GN, and Rosenberg LA. Studies in kernicterus. 3. The saturation of serum proteins with bilirubin during neonatal 
life and its relationship to brain damage at five years. Journal of Pediatrics 1970; 76:(1)12–21. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Odell GB. Neonatal jaundice. Progress in Liver Diseases 1976; 5:457–75. Overview – background information only 
Ogita S, Shimamoto T, Ohnishi M et al. Hemolytic pattern of erythrocytes in the newborn measured by the coil planet centrifuge 
system and its relationship to neonatal jaundice. European Journal of Pediatrics 1978; 127:(2)67–73. 
Laboratory tests 
Oktay R, Satar M, and Atici A. The risk of bilirubin encephalopathy in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Turkish Journal of Pediatrics 
1996; 38:(2)199–204. 
Link between free bilirubin and bilirubin 
encephalopathy 
Okumus N, Turkyilmaz C, Onal EE et al. Tau and S100B proteins as biochemical markers of bilirubin-induced neurotoxicity in 
term neonates. Pediatric Neurology 2008; 39:(4)245–52. 
Babies with sepsis were excluded 
Olah VA, Csathy L, and Karmazsin L. Erythrocyte damage in newborn babies caused by hyperbilirubinaemia and hypoxia. Acta 
Paediatrica Hungarica 1991; 31:(3)357–64. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Ostrea EM, Jr., Bassel M, Fleury CA et al. Influence of free fatty acids and glucose infusion on serum bilirubin and bilirubin 
binding to albumin: clinical implications. Journal of Pediatrics 1983; 102:(3)426–32. 
Study of the saturation index – test not relevant to 
this guideline 
Ostrea EM, Jr., Ongtengco EA, Tolia VA et al. The occurrence and significance of the bilirubin species, including delta bilirubin, 
in jaundiced infants. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition 1988; 7:(4)511–6. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Ostrow JD. Photochemical and biochemical basis of the treatment of neonatal jaundice. Progress in Liver Diseases 1972; 4:447–
62. 
Overview 
Ou CN, Buffone GJ, Herr-Calomeni PJ et al. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is overestimated in neonates with cholestasis. A 
more reliable method is proposed. American Journal of Clinical Pathology 1985; 84:(6)752–6. 
Not all subjects were newborn 
Owa JA and Dawodu AH. Neonatal jaundice among Nigerian preterm infants. East African Medical Journal 1988; 65:(8)552–6. Only preterm babies were included 
Owa JA and Dawodu AH. Neonatal jaundice among Nigerian preterm infants. West African Journal of Medicine 1990; 9:(4)252–
7. 
Only preterm babies were included 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
479 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Owa JA, Durosinmi MA, and Alabi AO. Determinants of severity of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia in ABO incompatibility in 
Nigeria. Tropical Doctor 1991; 21:(1)19–22. 
Study only included babies with ABO 
incompatibility 
Palmer DC and Drew JH. Jaundice: a 10 year review of 41,000 live born infants. Australian Paediatric Journal 1983; 19:(2)86–9. Study was superseded by a 15 year analysis of this 
data 
Pashapour N, Nikibahksh AA, and Golmohammadlou S. Urinary tract infection in term neonates with prolonged jaundice. 
Urology Journal 2007; 4:(2)91–4. 
Babies were only tested for urinary tract infections 
Pays M and Beljean M. Microdetermination of unbound bilirubin. Application to the prevention of kernicterus by estimation of 
the serum bilirubin binding capacity in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Zeitschrift fur Klinische Chemie und Klinische Biochemie 
1974; 12:(5)250–1. 
Conference abstract 
Penberthy L, St JA, and Blake G. Bilirubin analyses in neonatal jaundice. Medical Journal of Australia 1978; 1:(12)659. Correspondence 
Polacek K. Risk of kernicterus in newborn infants with a high level of conjugated bilirubin. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1966; 
55:(4)401–4. 
Only babies with conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia 
were included 
Priolisi A and Ziino L. Comparative analysis between the reserve albumin-binding capacity (HBABA method) and the saturation 
index of hyperbilirubinemic sera. Biology of the Neonate 1971; 19:(4)258–71. 
Tests not relevant to guideline 
Priolisi A. Clinical experience with Sephadex gel filtration for the estimation of non-albumin bound bilirubin in sera of jaundiced 
infants. Birth Defects: Original Article Series 1976; 12:(2)245–54. 
No test for G6PD  
Rastogi D and Rastogi S. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in healthy breast-fed newborn: Assessment at discharge. Emergency and 
Office Pediatrics 1999; 12:(3)100–2. 
Case study 
Ratnavel N and Ives NK. Investigation of prolonged neonatal jaundice. Current Paediatrics 2005; 15:(2)85–91. Overview 
Rehman H, Khan MA, Hameed A et al. Erythrocyte glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and neonatal jaundice. JPMA - 
Journal of the Pakistan Medical Association 1995; 45:(10)259–60. 
Incomplete data – numbers with blood group 
incompatibility not given 
Reiser DJ. Neonatal jaundice: physiologic variation or pathologic process. Critical Care Nursing Clinics of North America 2004; 
16:(2)257–69. 
Overview 
Ritter DA, Kenny JD, Norton HJ et al. A prospective study of free bilirubin and other risk factors in the development of kernicterus 
in premature infants. Pediatrics 1982; 69:(3)260–6. 
Not all babies who died had an autopsy 
Rolinski B, Kuster H, Ugele B et al. Total bilirubin measurement by photometry on a blood gas analyzer: potential for use in 
neonatal testing at the point of care. Clinical Chemistry 2001; 47:(10)1845–7. 
Comparison of methods to measure serum 
bilirubin 
Roux P, Karabus CD, and Hartley PS. The effect of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency on the severity of neonatal 
jaundice in Cape Town. South African Medical Journal 1982; 61:(21)781–2. 
Babies with blood group incompatibility were 
excluded 
Sansone G, Perroni L, and Yoshida A. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase variants from Italian subjects associated with severe 
neonatal jaundice. British Journal of Haematology 1975; 31:(2)159–65. 
Three cases studies 
Sarici SU, Serdar MA, Erdem G et al. Evaluation of plasma ionized magnesium levels in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatric 
Research 2004; 55:(2)243–7. 
Babies with ABO/Rh incompatibility or G6PD 
deficiency were excluded 
Sarma DK, Shukla R, Lodha A et al. Neonatal screening for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency: Experience in 
a private hospital. Emirates Medical Journal 2006; 24:(3)211–4. 
Babies only tested for G6PD deficiency 

Neonatal jaundice 
480 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Sasanakul W, Hathirat P, Jeraporn K et al. Neonatal jaundice and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Journal of the 
Medical Association of Thailand 1989; 72 Suppl 1:130–2. 
Babies were not tested for blood group 
incompatibility 
Satar M, Atici A, and Oktay R. The influence of clinical status on total bilirubin binding capacity in newborn infants. Journal of 
Tropical Pediatrics 1996; 42:(1)43–5. 
Test not relevant to this guideline – bilirubin 
binding capacity 
Scheidt PC, Graubard BI, Nelson KB et al. Intelligence at six years in relation to neonatal bilirubin levels: follow-up of the 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Clinical Trial of Phototherapy. Pediatrics 1991; 87:(6)797–805. 
Long term outcomes from an included RCT 
Schiff D, Chan G, and Stern L. Proceedings: Clinical implications of bilirubin-albumin binding in the newborn. Revue Canadienne 
de Biologie 1973; 32:(Suppl)-8. 
Comparison of two test to measure bilirubin-
albumin binding 
Settin A, Al-Haggar M, Al-Baz R et al. Screening for G6PD Mediterranean mutation among Egyptian neonates with high or 
prolonged jaundice. HAEMA 2006; 9:(1)81–8. 
Single test only 
Shenoi UD and Nandi GK. Bilirubin crystals in neutrophils in neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 1997; 
64:(1)93–6. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Siklar Z, Tezer H, Dallar Y et al. Borderline congenital hypothyroidism in the neonatal period. Journal of Pediatric Endocrinology 
2002; 15:(6)817–21. 
Test not relevant to guideline 
Singh B, Ezhilarasan R, Kumar P et al. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and its association with thyroid hormone levels and urinary 
iodine excretion. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 2003; 70:(4)311–5. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Slusher TM, Vreman HJ, McLaren DW et al. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and carboxyhemoglobin 
concentrations associated with bilirubin-related morbidity and death in Nigerian infants. Journal of Pediatrics 1995; 126:(1)102–8. 
Babies were not tested for ABO incompatibility 
Spear ML, Stahl GE, Hamosh M et al. Effect of heparin dose and infusion rate on lipid clearance and bilirubin binding in 
premature infants receiving intravenous fat emulsions. Journal of Pediatrics 1988; 112:(1)94–8. 
Not all babies were jaundiced 
Tateno M. Relationship between the serum transaminase activities and the serum bilirubin concentration in the icterus 
neonatorum. Acta Obstetrica et Gynaecologica Japonica 1970; 17:(4)239–44. 
Tests not relevant to this guideline 
Tazawa Y and Konno T. Urinary monohydroxy bile acids in young infants with obstructive jaundice. Acta Paediatrica 
Scandinavica 1982; 71:(1)91–5. 
Not all subjects newborn 
Tazawa Y, Abukawa D, Watabe M et al. Abnormal results of biochemical liver function tests in breast-fed infants with prolonged 
indirect hyperbilirubinaemia. European Journal of Pediatrics 1991; 150:(5)310–3. 
Study for a single syndrome in prolonged jaundice 
Tazawa Y, Yamada M, Nakagawa M et al. Serum bile acids and their conjugates in breast-fed infants with prolonged jaundice. 
European Journal of Pediatrics 1985; 144:(1)37–40. 
Test for a single disease 
Thaler MM. Jaundice in the newborn. Algorithmic diagnosis of conjugated and unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. JAMA: the 
journal of the American Medical Association 1977; 237:(1)58–62. 
Overview 
Tiker F, Gurakan B, and Tarcan A. Relationship between serum bilirubin and coagulation test results in 1-month-old infants. 
Indian Journal of Pediatrics 2005; 72:(3)205–7. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
Turgut M, Basaran O, Cekmen M et al. Oxidant and antioxidant levels in preterm newborns with idiopathic hyperbilirubinaemia. 
Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 2004; 40:(11)633–7. 
Babies with ABO or Rh incompatibility were 
excluded 
Uetani Y, Nakamura H, Okamoto O et al. Carboxyhemoglobin measurements in the diagnosis of ABO hemolytic disease. Acta 
Paediatrica Japonica 1989; 31:171–6. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
481 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Ullrich D, Fevery J, Sieg A et al. The influence of gestational age on bilirubin conjugation in newborns. European Journal of 
Clinical Investigation 1991; 21:(1)83–9. 
Babies with hepatic diseases were excluded 
Vaca G, Ibarra B, Hernandez A et al. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and abnormal hemoglobins in mexican 
newborns with jaundice. Revista de Investigacion Clinica 1981; 33:(3)259–61. 
Unclear if all babies were tested for blood group 
incompatibility 
Vos GH, Adhikari M, and Coovadia HM. A study of ABO incompatibility and neonatal jaundice in Black South African newborn 
infants. Transfusion 1981; 21:(6)744–9. 
Babies were not tested for G6PD 
Voutetakis A, Maniati-Christidi M, Kanaka-Gantenbein C et al. Prolonged jaundice and hypothyroidism as the presenting 
symptoms in a neonate with a novel Prop1 gene mutation (Q83X). European Journal of Endocrinology 2004; 150:(3)257–64. 
Case study 
Weiss JS, Gautam A, Lauff JJ et al. The clinical importance of a protein-bound fraction of serum bilirubin in patients with 
hyperbilirubinemia. New England Journal of Medicine 1983; 309:(3)147–50. 
Not all subjects had jaundice 
Wennberg R. Unbound bilirubin: a better predictor of kernicterus? Clinical Chemistry 2008; 54:(1)207–8. Opinion piece 
Wolf MJ, Beunen G, Casaer P et al. Extreme hyperbilirubinaemia in Zimbabwean neonates: neurodevelopmental outcome at 4 
months. European Journal of Pediatrics 1997; 156:(10)803–7. 
Babies were not tested for G6PD 
Wolf MJ, Beunen G, Casaer P et al. Neurological status in severely jaundiced Zimbabwean neonates. Journal of Tropical 
Pediatrics 1998; 44:(3)161–4. 
Babies were not tested for G6PD 
Wolf MJ, Wolf B, Beunen G et al. Neurodevelopmental outcome at 1 year in Zimbabwean neonates with extreme 
hyperbilirubinaemia. European Journal of Pediatrics 1999; 158:(2)111–4. 
Babies were not tested for G6PD 
Wolff JA, Grossman BH, and Paya K. Neonatal serum bilirubin and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Relationship of various 
perinatal factors to hyperbilirubinemia. American Journal of Diseases of Children 1967; 113:(2)251–4. 
Babies were not tested for blood group 
incompatibility 
Woodfield DG and Biddulph J. Neonatal jaundice and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in Papua New Guinea. 
Medical Journal of Australia 1975; 1:(14)443–6. 
Follow-up of an included study 
Yamada M, Tazawa Y, Nakagawa M et al. Alterations of serum bile acid profile in breast-fed infants with prolonged jaundice. 
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition 1985; 4:(5)741–5. 
Effect of prolonged jaundice on serum bile acid 
profile 
Yamauchi Y and Yamanouchi I. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry: Bilirubin kinetics of the skin and serum during and after 
phototherapy. Biology of the Neonate 1989; 56:(5)263–9. 
No test for G6PD  
Yen HJ, Chen SJ, Soong WJ et al. Analysis of test of hemolytic disease in newborn with neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Clinical 
Neonatology 2005; 12:(1)1–5. 
Study compared babies with haemolytic disease 
of the newborn with controls  
Yu MW, Hsiao KJ, Wuu KD et al. Association between glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and neonatal jaundice: 
interaction with multiple risk factors. International Journal of Epidemiology 1992; 21:(5)947–52. 
Not all babies tested for blood group 
incompatibility 
Yurdakok M and Yilmazoglu G. Gamma-glutamyl transferase in neonatal non-hemolytic indirect hyperbilirubinemia. Turkish 
Journal of Pediatrics 1990; 32:(1)21–3. 
Test not relevant to this guideline 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
482 
Phototherapy 
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Amato M, Howald H, and von MG. Interruption of breast-feeding versus phototherapy as treatment of hyperbilirubinemia in full-
term infants. Helvetica Paediatrica Acta 1985; 40:(2–3)127–31. 
Not all babies received phototherapy 
Boo NY and Chew EL. A randomised control trial of clingfilm for prevention of hypothermia in term infants during phototherapy. 
Singapore Medical Journal 2006; 47:(9)757–62. 
Intervention to prevent hypothermia 
Boo NY, Chee SC, and Rohana J. Randomized controlled study of the effects of different durations of light exposure on weight 
gain by preterm infants in a neonatal intensive care unit. Acta Paediatrica 2002; 91:(6)674–9. 
No jaundice-related outcomes 
Brown AK, Kim MH, Wu PY et al. Efficacy of phototherapy in prevention and management of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. 
Pediatrics 1985; 75:(2 Pt 2)393–400. 
Secondary publication of NICHHD study 
Bryla DA. Randomized, controlled trial of phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Development, design, and sample 
composition. Pediatrics 1985; 75:(2 Pt 2)387–92. 
Secondary publication of NICHHD study 
Costarino AT, Ennever JF, Baumgart S et al. Bilirubin photoisomerization in premature neonates under low- and high-dose 
phototherapy. Pediatrics 1985; 75:(3)519–22. 
Not an RCT 
Costarino AT, Jr., Ennever JF, Baumgart S  et al. Effect of spectral distribution on isomerization of bilirubin in vivo. Journal of 
Pediatrics 1985; 107:(1)125–8. 
Not an RCT 
Donzelli GP, Moroni M, Pratesi S et al. Fibreoptic phototherapy in the management of jaundice in low birthweight neonates. Acta 
Paediatrica 1996; 85:(3)366–70. 
Not an RCT 
Eggert LD, Pollary RA, Folland DS et al. Home phototherapy treatment of neonatal jaundice. Pediatrics 1985; 76:(4)579–84. Home phototherapy not relevant to this 
guideline 
Elliott E, Moncrieff MW, and George WH. Phototherapy for hyperbilirubinaemia in low birthweight infants. Archives of Disease in 
Childhood 1974; 49:(1)60–2. 
Not an RCT 
Ennever JF, Knox I, and Speck WT. Differences in bilirubin isomer composition in infants treated with green and white light 
phototherapy. Journal of Pediatrics 1986; 109:(1)119–22. 
Not an RCT 
Fiberoptic phototherapy systems. Health Devices 1995; 24:(4)132–53. Not an RCT 
Finlay HVL and Tucker SM. Neonatal plasma bilirubin chart. Archives of Disease in Childhood 2009; 53:(1)90. Background information 
Fuller J. Home phototherapy. Caring 1990; 9:(12)8–11. Home phototherapy not relevant to this 
guideline 
Garg AK, Prasad RS, and Hifzi IA. A controlled trial of high-intensity double-surface phototherapy on a fluid bed versus 
conventional phototherapy in neonatal jaundice. Pediatrics 1995; 95:(6)914–6. 
Not an RCT 
George P and Lynch M. Ohmeda Biliblanket vs Wallaby Phototherapy System for the reduction of bilirubin levels in the home-
care setting. Clinical Pediatrics 1994; 33:(3)178–80. 
Comparison of two types of fibreoptic 
phototherapy 
Giunta F and Rath J. Effect of environmental illumination in prevention of hyperbilirubinemia of prematurity. Pediatrics 1969; 
44:(2)162–7. 
Not an RCT 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
483 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Hammerman C and Kaplan M. Comparative effects of two phototherapy delivery systems on cerebral blood flow velocity in term 
neonates. Biology of the Neonate 2004; 86:(4)254–8. 
Not an RCT 
Hohenauer L, Haschke F, and Gerstl JW. [Fototherapy of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Results of its clinical application (author's 
transl)]. [German]. Klinische Padiatrie 1976; 188:(4)314–9. 
Non-English language articles 
Ittmann PE and Schumacher PI. Blue light special: randomized trial of fiberoptic phototherapy in preterm infants. Pediatric 
Research 1992; 31:205A. 
Conference abstract 
Jackson CL, Tudehope D, Willis L et al. Home phototherapy for neonatal jaundice--technology and teamwork meeting consumer 
and service need. Australian Health Review 2000; 23:(2)162–8. 
Not an RCT 
Jaldo-Alba F, Munoz-Hoyos A, Molina-Carballo A et al. Light deprivation increases plasma levels of melatonin during the first 72 h 
of life in human infants. Acta Endocrinologica 1993; 129:(5)442–5. 
Not an RCT 
Kang JH and Shankaran S. Double phototherapy with high irradiance compared with single phototherapy in neonates with 
hyperbilirubinemia. American Journal of Perinatology 1995; 12:(3)178–80. 
Not an RCT 
Kaplan E, Herz F, Scheye E et al. Phototherapy in ABO hemolytic disease of the newborn infant. Journal of Pediatrics 1971; 
79:(6)911–4. 
Not an RCT 
Kaplan M and Abramov A. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia associated with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in 
Sephardic-Jewish neonates: Incidence, severity, and the effect of phototherapy. Pediatrics 1992; 90:(3 I)401–5. 
Effect of G6PD deficiency status of phototherapy 
Kurt A, Aygun AD, Kurt ANC et al. Use of phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia affects cytokine production and 
lymphocyte subsets. Neonatology 2009; 95:(3)262–6. 
Outcome not relevant to this guideline 
Landry RJ, Scheidt PC, and Hammond RW. Ambient light and phototherapy conditions of eight neonatal care units: A summary 
report. Pediatrics 1985; 75:(2 II SUPPL.)434–6. 
Not an RCT 
Lemaitre BJ, Toubas PL, Dreux C et al. Increased gonadotropin levels in newborn premature females treated by phototherapy. 
Journal of Steroid Biochemistry 1979; 10:(3)335–7. 
Outcome was not relevant to this guideline 
Lucey J, Ferriero M, and Hewitt J. Prevention of hyperbilirubinemia of prematurity by phototherapy. Pediatrics 1968; 41:(6)1047–
54. 
Not an RCT 
Ludington-Hoe SM and Swinth JY. Kangaroo mother care during phototherapy: effect on bilirubin profile. Neonatal Network - 
Journal of Neonatal Nursing 2001; 20:(5)41–8. 
Comparison of three methods of giving 24 hour 
phototherapy 
Maisels MJ and Gifford K. Normal serum bilirubin levels in the newborn and the effect of breast-feeding. Pediatrics 1986; 
78:(5)837–43. 
Not an RCT 
Maisels MJ, Kring EA, and DeRidder J. Randomized controlled trial of light-emitting diode phototherapy. Journal of Perinatology 
2007; 27:(9)565–7. 
Comparison of two methods of applying 
multiple phototherapy 
Maurer, H. M.; Fratkin, M.; McWilliams, N. B.; Kirkpatrick, B.; Draper, D.; Haggins, J. C.; Hunter, C. R. Effects of Phototherapy on 
Platelet Counts in Low-Birthweight Infants and on Platelet Production and Life Span in Rabbits. Pediatrics 1976,  57, 506–512. 
No jaundice related outcomes 
Mohapatra SS, Menon PS, Bhan MK et al. Cockington nomogram as a guide to phototherapy in the management of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia: evaluation in Indian neonates. Indian Pediatrics 1984; 21:(3)229–33. 
Comparison of two criteria for managing 
hyperbilirubinaemia 
Newman T, Kuzniewicz M, Liljestrand P et al. Numbers Needed to Treat with Phototherapy According to American Academy of 
Pediatrics Guidelines. Pediatrics . 2009.  
Background information 

Neonatal jaundice 
484 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Niknafs P, Mortazavi AA, Torabinejad MH et al. Intermittent versus continuous phototherapy for reducing neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia. Iranian Journal of Pediatrics 2008; 18:(3)251–6. 
Comparison of two forms of intermittent 
phototherapy 
Ozkan H, Olgun N, Oren H et al. The effect of phototherapy on total phospholipid levels of red cell membrane in jaundiced 
neonates. Indian Journal of Pediatrics  1993; 60:(4)600–2. 
Not an RCT 
Ozmert E, Erdem G, Topcu M et al. Long-term follow-up of indirect hyperbilirubinemia in full-term Turkish infants. Acta 
Paediatrica 1996; 85:(12)1440–4. 
Not an RCT 
Pezzati M, Biagiotti R, Vangi V et al. Changes in mesenteric blood flow response to feeding: Conventional versus fiber-optic 
phototherapy. Pediatrics 2000; 105:(2)350–3. 
Not an RCT 
Pritchard MA, Beller EM, and Norton B. Skin exposure during conventional phototherapy in preterm infants: A randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 2004; 40:(5–6)270–4. 
Comparison of two combinations of  positioning 
combined with clothing  
Randomized, controlled trial of phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Executive summary. Pediatrics 1985; 75:(2 Pt 
2)385–6. 
Executive summary 
Reid MM, Marks E, McClure G et al. Phototherapy in rhesus haemolytic disease. Lancet 1972; 1:(7756)879–80. Not an RCT 
Rosenfeld W, Twist P, and Concepcion L. A new device for phototherapy treatment of jaundiced infants. Journal of Perinatology 
1990; 10:(3)243–8. 
Not an RCT 
Sarici SU, Alpay F, Unay B et al. Comparison of the efficacy of conventional special blue light phototherapy and fiberoptic 
phototherapy in the management of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. Acta Paediatrica 1999; 88:(11)1249–53. 
Not an RCT 
Sarici SU, Alpay F, Unay B et al. Double versus single phototherapy in term newborns with significant hyperbilirubinemia. Journal 
of Tropical Pediatrics 2000; 46:(1)36–9. 
Not an RCT 
Sarin M, Dutta S, and Narang A. Randomized controlled trial of compact fluorescent lamp versus standard phototherapy for the 
treatment of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Indian Pediatrics 2006; 43:(7)583–90. 
Comparison of two types of fluorescent lamps 
Scheidt PC, Bryla DA, Nelson KB et al. Phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia: six-year follow-up of the National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development clinical trial. Pediatrics 1990; 85:(4)455–63. 
Follow-up of an included study 
Sharma SK, Sood SC, Sharma A et al. Double versus single surface phototherapy in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Indian Pediatrics 
1985; 22:(3)235–9. 
Not an RCT 
Srivastava KL, Misra PK, Kaul R et al. Double surface phototherapy versus single surface phototherapy in neonatal jaundice. 
Indian Journal of Medical Research 1980; 71:746–50. 
Not an RCT 
Tabb PA, Savage DC, Inglis J et al. Controlled trial of phototherapy of limited duration in the treatment of physiological 
hyperbilirubinaemia in low-birth-weight infants.  Lancet 1972; 2:(7789)1211–2. 
Incomplete data – 1 case of exchange 
transfusion but group allocation not given 
Tan KL, Chirino-Barcelo Y, Aw TC et al. Effect of phototherapy on thyroid stimulatory hormone and free thyroxine levels. Journal 
of Paediatrics and Child Health 1996; 32:(6)508–11. 
Not an RCT 
Tan KL. Comparison of the efficacy of fiberoptic and conventional phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of 
Pediatrics 1994; 125:(4)607–12. 
Not an RCT 
Tan KL. Decreased response to phototherapy for neonatal jaundice in breast-fed infants. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine 1998; 152:(12)1187–90. 
Not an RCT 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
485 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Thaithumyanon P and Visutiratmanee C. Double phototherapy in jaundiced term infants with hemolysis. Journal of the Medical 
Association of Thailand 2002; 85:(11)1176–81. 
Not an RCT 
Yaseen H, Khalaf M, Rashid N et al. Does prophylactic phototherapy prevent hyperbilirubinemia in neonates with ABO 
incompatibility and positive Coombs' test? Journal of Perinatology 2005; 25:(9)590–4. 
Not an RCT 
Zainab K and Adlina S. Effectiveness of home versus hospital phototherapy for term infants with uncomplicated 
hyperbilirubinemia: a pilot study in Pahang, Malaysia. Medical Journal of Malaysia 2004; 59:(3)395–401. 
Conference abstract 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
486 
Is it beneficial to give additional fluids (cup feeds, fluids) during treatment with phototherapy?  
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Amato M, Berthet G, and von MG. Influence of fatty diet on neonatal jaundice in breast-fed infants. Acta Paediatrica Japonica 
1988; 30:(4)492–6. 
Not an intervention study 
Arias IM and Gartner LM. Production of unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia in full-term in new-born infants following 
administration of pregnane-3(Alpha),20(Beta)-diol.. Nature 1964; 203:1292–3. 
Not an intervention study 
Capps FP, Gilles HM, Jolly H et al. Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase deficiency and neonatal jaundice in Nigeria: Their 
relation to the use of prophylactic vitamin-K. Lancet 1963; 2:(7304)379–83. 
Prevention study 
De Carvalho M, Hall M, and Harvey D. Effects of water supplementation on physiological jaundice in breast-fed babies. Archives 
of Disease in Childhood 1981; 56:(7)568–9. 
Prevention study 
Elander G and Lindberg T. Hospital routines in infants with hyperbilirubinemia influence the duration of breast feeding.  Acta 
Paediatrica Scandinavica 1986; 75:(5)708–12. 
Not an RCT 
Gourley GR, Li Z, Kreamer BL et al. A controlled, randomized, double-blind trial of prophylaxis against jaundice among breastfed 
newborns. Pediatrics 2005; 116:(2)385–91. 
Prevention study 
Gulcan H, Tiker F, and Kilicdag H. Effect of feeding type on the efficacy of phototherapy. Indian Pediatrics 2007; 44:(1)32–6. Not an RCT 
Lucas A and Baker BA. Breast milk jaundice in premature infants. Archives of Disease in Childhood 1986; 61:(11)1063–7. Prevention study 
Lucas A, Gore SM, Cole TJ et al. Multicentre trial on feeding low birthweight infants: effects of diet on early growth. Archives of 
Disease in Childhood 1984; 59:(8)722–30. 
Prevention study 
Makay B, Duman N, Ozer E et al. Randomized, controlled trial of early intravenous nutrition for prevention of neonatal jaundice 
in term and near-term neonates. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition 2007; 44:(3)354–8. 
Not all babies received phototherapy 
Mowat A. Double-blind trial of effects of aspartic acid, orotic acid and glucose on serum bilirubin concentrations in infants born 
before term. Archives of Disease in Childhood 1971; 46:(247)397. 
Conference abstract 
Nicoll A, Ginsburg R, and Tripp JH. Supplementary feeding and jaundice in newborns. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1982; 
71:(5)759–61. 
Prevention study 
Osborn LM and Bolus R. Breast feeding and jaundice in the first week of life. Journal of Family Practice 1985; 20:(5)475–80. Prevention study 
Sievers E, Clausen U, Oldigs HD et al. Supplemental feeding in the first days of life - Effects on the recipient infant. Annals of 
Nutrition and Metabolism 2002; 46:(2)62–7. 
Prevention study 
Spear ML, Stahl GE, and Paul MH. The effect of 15-hour fat infusions of varying dosage on bilirubin binding to albumin. Journal of 
Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition 1985; 9:(2)144–7. 
Not an RCT 
Varimo P, Simila S, von WL et al. Interruption of breast feeding as treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia. Helvetica Paediatrica Acta 
1985; 40:(6)497–9. 
Correspondence 
Villalaz RA, Toner N, and Chiswick ML. Dietary vitamin E and polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) in newborn babies with 
physiological jaundice. Early Human Development 1981; 5:(2)145–50. 
Not an RCT 
Wennberg RP, Schwartz R, and Sweet AY. Early versus delayed feeding of low birth weight infants: effects on physiologic 
jaundice. Journal of Pediatrics 1966; 68:(6)860–6. 
Prevention study 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
487 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Wharton BA and Bower BD. Immediate or later feeding for premature babies? A controlled trial. Lancet 1965; 2:(7420)769–72. Not an RCT 
Winfield CR and MacFaul R. Clinical study of prolonged jaundice in breast- and bottle-fed babies. Archives of Disease in 
Childhood 1978; 53:(6)506–7. 
Effect of breastfeeding on prolonged jaundice – 
No intervention 
Wu PY and Moosa A. Effect of phototherapy on nitrogen and electrolyte levels and water balance in jaundiced preterm infants. 
Pediatrics 1978; 61:(2)193–8. 
Not an RCT 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
488 
Exchange transfusion 
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Bajpai PC, Denton RL, Harpur E et al. The effect on serum ionic magnesium of exchange transfusion with citrated as opposed to 
heparinized blood. Canadian Medical Association Journal 1967; 96:(3)148–53. 
No jaundice related outcomes 
Behjati S, Sagheb S, Aryasepehr S et al. Adverse events associated with neonatal exchange transfusion for hyperbilirubinemia. 
Indian Journal of Pediatrics 2009; 76:(1)83–5. 
Adverse effects of exchange transfusions in Iran – 
not relevant to UK guideline 
Chen H, Lee M, and Tsao L. Exchange transfusion using peripheral vessels is safe and effective in newborn infants. Pediatrics 
2008; 122:(4)e905-e910. 
Conference abstract 
Cser A. Metabolic and hormonal changes during and after exchange transfusion with heparinized or ACD blood. Archives of 
Disease in Childhood 1974; 49:(12)940–5. 
No jaundice related outcomes 
Karamifar H, Pishva N, and Amirhakimi GH. Prevalence of phototherapy-induced hypocalcemia. Iranian Journal of Medical 
Sciences 2002; 27:(4)166–8. 
Outcome not of interest to GDG 
Kauschansky A, Dulitzky F, and Allalouf D. Thyroxine, thyrotropin, and thyroxine-binding globulin changes following neonatal 
blood exchange transfusions. Israel Journal of Medical Sciences 1980; 16:(12)883. 
Conference abstract 
Kreuger AO. Exchange transfusion with ACD-adenine blood. A follow-up study. Transfusion 1973; 13:(2)69–72. Not an RCT 
Ozsoylu S. Heparinised whole blood or citrated blood for exchange transfusion. European Journal of Pediatrics  2001; 160:(3). Correspondence 
Paul SS, Thomas V, and Singh D. Outcome of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia managed with exchange transfusion. Indian Pediatrics 
1988; 25:(8)765–9. 
Not an RCT 
Raichur DV, Wari PK, Kasturi AV et al. Peripheral vessel exchange transfusion. Indian Pediatrics 1999; 36:914–7. Not an RCT 
Salas AA and Mazzi E. Exchange transfusion in infants with extreme hyperbilirubinemia: An experience from a developing 
country. Acta Paediatrica 2008; 97:(6)754–8. 
Survey of adverse effects in a developing country 
Strbak V, Huttova M, and Foldes O. Exchange transfusion in newborns: Rapid fall of plasma thyroid hormones and attenuated 
TSH response up to 48 hours. Endocrinologia Experimentalis 1982; 16:(1)33–42. 
Not an RCT 
Thayyil S and Milligan DWA. Single versus double volume exchange transfusion in jaundiced newborn infants. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews 2008;(3). 
Review of a single study – included the original 
study  
Todd NA. Isovolemic exchange transfusion of the neonate. Neonatal Network 1995; 14:(6)75–7. Not an RCT 
 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
489 
What are the other ways of treating hyperbilirubinaemia? 
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Agarwal SS, Misra PK, Upadhyay UK et al. Comparative trials of phototherapy versus photobarb in the management of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Indian Pediatrics 1976; 13:(1)41–5. 
Not an RCT 
Alpay F, Sarici SU, Okutan V et al. High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in neonatal immune haemolytic jaundice. 
Acta Paediatrica 1999; 88:(2)216–9. 
Not an RCT 
Amitai Y, Regev M, Arad I et al. Treatment of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia with repetitive oral activated charcoal as an adjunct to 
phototherapy. Journal of Perinatal Medicine 1993; 21:(3)189–94. 
Not an RCT 
Arya VB, Agarwal R, Paul VK et al. Efficacy of Oral Phenobarbitone in Term "At Risk" Neonates in Decreasing Neonatal 
Hyperbilirubinemia: A Randomized Double-blinded, Placebo Controlled Trial. Indian Pediatrics 2004; 41:(4)327–32. 
Prevention study 
Ashkan MM and Narges P. Erratum: The effect of low and moderate doses of clofibrate on serum bilirubin level in jaundiced term 
neonates (Paediatric and Perinatal Drug Therapy (2007) vol. 8 (51–54)). Paediatric and Perinatal Drug Therapy 2008; 8:(4)157. 
Erratum 
Ashkan MM and Narges P. The effect of low and moderate doses of clofibrate on serum bilirubin level in jaundiced term 
neonates. Paediatric and Perinatal Drug Therapy 2007; 8:(2)51–4. 
Paper withdrawn as it was a duplicate publication 
Badeli HR, Sharafi R, and Sajedi SA. The effect of clofibrate on neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in uncomplicated jaundice. Iranian 
Journal of Pediatrics 2008; 18:(1)-24. 
Not an RCT 
Bader D, Yanir Y, Kugelman A et al. Induction of early meconium evacuation: Is it effective in reducing the level of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia? American Journal of Perinatology 2005; 22:(6)329–33. 
Prevention study 
Blum D and Etienne J. Agar in control of hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Pediatrics 1973; 83:(2)345. Correspondence 
Caglayan S, Candemir H, Aksit S et al. Superiority of oral agar and phototherapy combination in the treatment of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics 1993; 92:(1)86–9. 
Incomplete data (not information given on 
numbers allocated to each group) 
Canby JP. Charcoal therapy of neonatal jaundice: A preliminary report on a promising method for reducing the need for exchange 
transfusions. Clinical Pediatrics 1965; 4:178–80. 
Not an RCT 
Chen H. Artemisia composita for the prevention and treatment of neonatal hemolysis and hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine 1987; 7:(2)105–8. 
Not an RCT 
Chen JY, Ling UP, and Chen JH. Early meconium evacuation: Effect on neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. American Journal of 
Perinatology 1995; 12:(4)232–4. 
Prevention study 
Ebbesen F and Brodersen R. Comparison between two preparations of human serum albumin in treatment of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1982; 71:(1)85–90. 
Not an RCT 
Girish G, Chawla D, Agarwal R et al. Efficacy of two dose regimes of intravenous immunoglobulin in rh hemolytic disease of 
newborn - A randomized controlled trial. Indian Pediatrics 2008; 45:(8)653–9. 
Prevention study 
Gouyon JB, Collin A, and d'Athis P. Effect of preventive phenobarbital treatment on the duration of phototherapy in low birth 
weight icteric twins. Developmental Pharmacology and Therapeutics 1984; 7:(SUPPL. 1)-193. 
Prevention study 
Hammerman C, Kaplan M, Vreman HJ et al. Intravenous immune globulin in neonatal ABO isoimmunization: Factors associated 
with clinical efficacy. Biology of the Neonate 1996; 70:(2)69–74. 
Not an RCT 

Neonatal jaundice 
490 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Herbal teas blamed for neonatal jaundice.  Doctor 1989;(Feb)35. Comment 
Hosono S, Ohno T, Kimoto H et al. Effects of albumin infusion therapy on total and unbound bilirubin values in term infants with 
intensive phototherapy. Pediatrics International 2001; 43:(1)8–11. 
Not an RCT 
 Jinbang D. Brain damage due to neonatal kernicterus successfully reversed with acupuncture: a case report. American Journal of 
Acupuncture 1995; 23:(1)5–7. 
Not an RCT 
Kappas A, Drummond GS, Henschke C et al. Direct comparison of Sn-mesoporphyrin, an inhibitor of bilirubin production, and 
phototherapy in controlling hyperbilirubinemia in term and near-term newborns. Pediatrics 1995; 95:(4)468–74. 
Prevention study 
Kappas A, Drummond GS, Manola T et al. Sn-protoporphyrin use in the management of hyperbilirubinemia in term newborns 
with direct Coombs-positive ABO incompatibility. Pediatrics 1988; 81:(4)485–97. 
Two prevention studies 
Kemper K, Horwitz RI, and McCarthy P. Decreased neonatal serum bilirubin with plain agar: A meta-analysis. Pediatrics 1988; 
82:(4)631–8. 
Not an RCT 
Khosla D, Lall JC, and Sood SC. A comparative trial of phototherapy, with and without riboflavin, in the management of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Indian Journal of Medical Research 1981; 74:(6)852–6. 
Not an RCT 
Koranyi G, Kovacs J, and Voros I. D-penicillamine treatment of hyperbilirubinaemia in preterm infants. Acta Paediatrica 
Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 1978; 19:(1)9–16. 
Prevention study 
Kumar R, Narang A, Kumar P et al. Phenobarbitone prophylaxis for neonatal jaundice in babies with birth weight 1000–1499 
grams. Indian Pediatrics 2002; 39:(10)945–51. 
Prevention study 
Lakatos L, Kover B, and Peter F. D-penicillamine therapy of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. Acta Paediatrica Academiae 
Scientiarum Hungaricae 1974; 15:(1)77–85. 
Not an RCT 
Lakatos L, Kover B, Vekerdy S et al. D-penicillamine therapy of neonatal jaundice: comparison with phototherapy. Acta 
Paediatrica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 1976; 17:(2)93–102. 
Not an RCT 
Levin GE, McMullin GP, and Mobarak AN. Controlled trial of phenobarbitone in neonatal jaundice. Archives of Disease in 
Childhood 1970; 45:(239)93–6. 
Not an RCT 
Liu L-H, Wang S-Y, Shu X-H et al. [Treatment of newborn breast - Milk jaundice using artemisia capillaris trough grass soup]. 
Journal of Dalian Medical University  2007; 29:(2)183–4. 
Not an RCT 
Malamitsi-Puchner A, Hadjigeorgiou E, Papadakis D et al. Combined treatment of neonatal jaundice with phototherapy, 
cholestyramine, and bicarbonate. Journal of Pediatrics 1981; 99:(2)324–5. 
Duplicate publication 
Martinez JC, Garcia HO, Otheguy LE et al. Control of severe hyperbilirubinemia in full-term newborns with the inhibitor of 
bilirubin production Sn-mesoporphyrin. Pediatrics 1999; 103:(1)1–5. 
Prevention study 
Moller J. Agar ingestion and serum bilirubin values in newborn infants. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica - 
Supplement 1974; 29:61–3. 
Prevention study 
Murki S, Dutta S, Narang A et al. A randomized, triple-blind, placebo-controlled trial of prophylactic oral phenobarbital to reduce 
the need for phototherapy in G6PD-deficient neonates. Journal of Perinatology 2005; 25:(5)325–30. 
Prevention study 
Orzalesi M, Savignori PG, and Nodari S. The effect of agar feeding on serum bilirubin levels of low birthweight infants.  Pediatric 
Research 1975; 9:369. 
Conference abstract 
Pawaskar N. Alertness is the key! National Journal of Homoeopathy 2004; 6:(2)109–10. Not an RCT 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
491 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Pishva N, Madani A, and Homayoon K. Prophylactic intravenous immunoglobulin in neonatal immune hemolytic jaundice. 
Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences 2000; 25:(3–4)129. 
Prevention study 
Poland RL and Odell GB. Physiologic jaundice: the enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin. New England Journal of Medicine 
1971; 284:(1)1–6. 
Prevention study 
Ramboer C, Thompson RP, and Williams R. Controlled trials of phenobarbitone therapy of neonatal jaundice. Lancet 1969; 
1:(7602)966–8. 
Prevention study 
Ramboer C, Thompson RP, and Williams R. Treatment of neonatal jaundice with phenobarbitone. Gut 1969; 10:(5)414. Conference abstract 
Romagnoli C, Polidori G, Foschini M et al. Agar in the management of hyperbilirubinaemia in the premature baby. Archives of 
Disease in Childhood 1975; 50:(3)202–4. 
Prevention study 
Rubo J, Wahn V, Hohendahl J et al. Influence of high dosage immuno-globulin therapy on hyperbilirubinemia in rhesus-hemolytic 
disease. A cooperative study. Monatsschrift fur Kinderheilkunde 1996; 144:(5)516–9. 
Non-English language paper 
Salle B, Pasquer P, Desebbe C et al. Phenobarbital in prophylaxis of neonatal jaundice. A control trial of two regimens. Helvetica 
Paediatrica Acta 1977; 32:(3)221–6. 
Prevention study 
Segni G, Polidori G, and Romagnoli C. Bucolome in prevention of hyperbilirubinaemia in preterm infants. Archives of Disease in 
Childhood 1977; 52:(7)549–50. 
Prevention study 
Spinelli SL, Otheguy LE, Larguia MA et al. Postnatal use of high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in rhesus hemolytic 
disease treatment. Journal of Perinatal Medicine 2001; 29:(Suppl 1)683. 
Conference abstract 
Tanyer G, SiklarZ, Dallar Y et al. Multiple dose IVIG treatment in neonatal immune hemolytic jaundice. Journal of Tropical 
Pediatrics 2001; 47:(1)50–3. 
Not an RCT 
Todorovic N, Lukic B, and Barjaktarovic N. The effect of phototherapy and phenobarbital on sister-chromatid exchanges in 
jaundiced newborns. Archives of Gastroenterohepatology 1993; 12:(3–4)143–4. 
Not an RCT 
Trevett TN, Jr., Dorman K, Lamvu G et al. Antenatal maternal administration of phenobarbital for the prevention of exchange 
transfusion in neonates with hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 2005; 
192:(2)478–82. 
Not an RCT 
Valaes T, Drummond GS, and Kappas A. Control of hyperbilirubinemia in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficient 
newborns using an inhibitor of bilirubin production, Sn-mesoporphyrin. Pediatrics 1998; 101:(5)E1. 
Five prevention studies 
Valaes T, Kipouros K, Petmezaki S et al. Effectiveness and safety of prenatal phenobarbital for the prevention of neonatal jaundice. 
Pediatric Research 1980; 14:(8)947–52. 
Prevention study 
Valaes T, Petmezaki S, and Doxiadis SA. Effect on neonatal hyperbilirubinemia of phenobarbital during pregnancy or after birth: 
practical value of the treatment in a population with high risk of unexplained severe neonatal jaundice. Birth defects original 
article series 1970; 6:(2)46–54. 
Prevention study 
Valaes T, Petmezaki S, Henschke C et al. Control of jaundice in preterm newborns by an inhibitor of bilirubin production: studies 
with tin-mesoporphyrin. Pediatrics 1994; 93:(1)1–11. 
Prevention study 
Valdes OS, Maurer HM, Shumway CN et al. Controlled clinical trial of phenobarbital and-or light in reducing neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia in a predominantly Negro population. Journal of Pediatrics 1971; 79:(6)1015–7. 
Prevention study 
Vest M, Signer E, Weisser K et al. A double blind study of the effect of phenobarbitone on neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and 
frequency of exchange transfusion. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1970; 59:(6)681–4. 
Prevention study 

Neonatal jaundice 
492 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Wallin A and Boreus LO. Phenobarbital prophylaxis for hyperbilirubinemia in preterm infants. A controlled study of bilirubin 
disappearance and infant behavior. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica  1984; 73:(4)488–97. 
Prevention study 
Weisman LE, Merenstein GB, and Digirol M. The effect of early meconium evacuation on early-onset hyperbilirubinemia. 
American Journal of Diseases of Children 1983; 137:(7)666–8. 
Prevention study 
Windorfer A, Jr., Kunzer W, Bolze H et al. Studies on the effect of orally administered agar on the serum bilirubin level of 
premature infants and mature newborns. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1975; 64:(5)699–702. 
Prevention study 
Yeung CY and Field CE. Phenobarbitone therapy in neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. Lancet 1969; 2:(7612)135–9. Not an RCT 
Zhuo A, Luo L, Chen C et al. Clinical observation of Chinese drugs in prevention of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine 1997; 17:(3)174–7. 
Prevention study 
 

Appendix J: Excluded studies 
493 
Q9. How to monitor a baby with jaundice? 
Q101. When to discharge a baby treated for hyperbilirubinaemia? What follow -up is required? 
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Chou S, Palmer RH, Ezhuthachan S et al. Management of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns: measuring performance by using a 
benchmarking model. Pediatrics 2003; 112:(6)1264–73. 
Overview 
Dhaded SM, Kumar P, and Narang A. Safe bilirubin level for term babies with non-hemolytic jaundice. Indian Pediatrics 1996; 
33:(12)1059–60. 
Correspondence 
Dollberg G, Mimouni M, and Dollberg S. Computerized decision-making assistance for managing neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.  
Pediatrics 2006; 117:(1)262–3. 
Overview of a software package to assist decision 
making 
Erdeve O. Rebound bilirubin: On what should the decision to recommence phototherapy be based? Archives of Disease in 
Childhood 2006; 91:(7)623. 
Correspondence 
Gale R, Seidman DS, and Stevenson DK. Hyperbilirubinemia and early discharge. Journal of Perinatology 2001; 21:(1)40–3. Overview 
Hyperbilirubinemia in term newborn infants. The Canadian Paediatric Society. Canadian Family Physician 1999; 45:2690–2. Position statement 
Lasker MR and Holzman IR. Neonatal jaundice: When to treat, when to watch and wait. Postgraduate Medicine 1996; 99:(3)187–
98. 
Overview 
Lock M and Ray JG. Higher neonatal morbidity after routine early hospital discharge: Are we sending newborns home too early? 
Canadian Medical Association Journal 1999; 161:(3)249–53. 
Impact of early discharge from hospital on 
incidence of jaundice 
Managing hyperbilirubinemia and preventing kernicterus. Joint Commission Perspectives on Patient Safety 2006; 6:(6)3. Overview 
Managing jaundice in full-term infants. Nurse Practitioner 2005; 30:(1)6–7. Synopsis of AAP 2004 
Moerschel SK, Cianciaruso LB, and Tracy LR. A practical approach to neonatal jaundice. American Family Physician 2008; 
77:(9)1255–62. 
Overview 
Pados BF. Safe transition to home: preparing the near-term infant for discharge. Newborn & Infant Nursing Reviews 2007; 
7:(2)106–13. 
Overview 
Reyes CA, Stednitz DR, Hahn C et al. Evaluation of the BiliChek being used on hyperbilirubinemic newborns undergoing home 
phototherapy. Archives of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine 2008; 132:(4)684–9. 
Evaluation of BiliChek usage during home 
phototherapy 
Screening reduces the occurrence of hyperbilirubinemia. Contemporary Pediatrics 2006; 23:(7)85. Overview of screening to prevention jaundice 
Thornton SN, Thompson BS, Millar JA et al. Neonatal bilirubin management as an implementation example of interdisciplinary 
continuum of care tools. AMIA .. 2007; Annual Symposium Proceedings/AMIA Symposium.:726–30. 
Overview 
Wennberg RP, Ahlfors CE, Bhutani VK et al. Toward understanding kernicterus: a challenge to improve the management of 
jaundiced newborns. Pediatrics 2006; 117:(2)474–85. 
Overview 
Zanjani SE, Safavi M, Jalali S et al. Incidence and associated factors of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia at Hedayat Hospital [Farsi]. 
SBMU Faculty of Nursing & Midwifery Quarterly 2007; 16:(59)-1p. 
Non-English language article 
 

Neonatal jaundice 
494 
Q11. What information and support should be given to parents/carers of babies with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia?  
 
Reference Reason for exclusion 
Amirshaghaghi A, Ghabili K, Shoja MM et al. Neonatal jaundice: knowledge and practice of Iranian mothers with icteric 
newborns. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences 2008; 11:(6)942–5. 
Maternal knowledge of jaundice 
Balaguer A, Quiroga-Gonzalez R, Camprubi M  et al. Reducing errors in the management of hyperbilirubinaemia: validating a 
software application. Archives of Disease in Childhood - Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2009; 94:(1)F45-F47. 
Evaluation of a software package 
Callaghan P, Greenberg L, Brasseux C et al. Postpartum counseling perceptions and practices: What's new? Ambulatory Pediatrics 
2003; 3:(6)284–7. 
Dealt with postpartum counseling 
Christakis DA and Rivara FP. Pediatricians' awareness of and attitudes about four clinical practice guidelines. Pediatrics 1998; 
101:(5)825–30. 
Awareness of guidelines 
Davanzo R, Brondello C, and Cerchio R. Hospital discharge of healthy newborns. [Italian]. Medico e Bambino 2006; 25:(9)562–9. Non-=English language article 
Going home with your late preterm infant.  Contemporary Pediatrics 2007; 24:(11)59. Example of a parent information sheet 
Goldenring JM. What to tell parents before they leave the hospital. Contemporary Pediatrics 2007; 24:(4)52. Example of a parent information sheet 
Information from your family doctor. Jaundice and your baby. American Family Physician 2002; 65:(4)613–4. Example of a parent information sheet 
Jaundice in newborns. Information for patients. Canadian Family Physician 1999; 45:2696. Example of a parent information sheet 
Khalesi N and Rakhshani F. Knowledge, attitude and behaviour of mothers on neonatal jaundice. JPMA - Journal of the Pakistan 
Medical Association 2008; 58:(12)671–4. 
Maternal knowledge of jaundice 
Madlon-Kay DJ. Maternal assessment of neonatal jaundice after hospital discharge. Journal of Family Practice 2002; 51:(5)445–8. Training parents to assess jaundice 
Maisels MJ. Jaundice in a newborn: answers to questions about a common clinical problem... first of two parts. Contemporary 
Pediatrics 2005; 22:(5)34–40. 
Overview 
Maisels MJ. Jaundice in a newborn: how to head off an urgent situation... second of two parts. Contemporary Pediatrics 2005; 
22:(5)41. 
Overview 
Mannel R. Initiating breastfeeding and special considerations for the infant with hyperbilirubinemia: what the childbirth educator 
needs to know. International Journal of Childbirth Education 2006; 21:(1)11–3. 
Education on breastfeeding – not specific to 
jaundice 
McMillan DD, Lockyer JM, Magnan L et al. Effect of educational program and interview on adoption of guidelines for the 
management of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.[see comment]. CMAJ Canadian Medical Association Journal 1991; 144:(6)707–12. 
Eduction was for clinicians 
Ogunfowora OB, Adefuye PO, and Fetuga MB. What do expectant mothers know about neonatal jaundice? International 
Electronic Journal of Health Education 2006; 9:134–40. 
Maternal knowledge of jaundice 
Patient education. How to care for your baby with jaundice. Nurse Practitioner 1999; 24:(4)29. Example of a parent information sheet 
Petrova A, Mehta R, Birchwood G et al. Management of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia: Pediatricians' practices and educational 
needs. BMC Pediatrics 2006; 6,;#2006. Article Number. 
Education for clinicians 
Sater KJ. Color me yellow: caring for the infant with hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Intravenous Nursing 1995; 18:(6)317–25. Overview – background information only 
Stokowski LA. Family teaching toolbox. Newborn jaundice. Advances in Neonatal Care 2002; 2:(2)115–6. Example of a parent information sheet 

 
495 
Abbreviations, Glossary and 
References 
Abbreviations 
AAP American Academy of Pediatrics 
ABR auditory brainstem response 
AROC area under the ROC curve 
B/A ratio bilirubin/albumin ratio  
BW birthweight 
CMA A form of cost-effectiveness analysis where the treatment alternatives are 
considered to be equally effective. Where treatments are equally effective the 
least costly is the most cost-effective 
CPD citrate phosphate dextrose 
DAT direct antiglobulin test, also known as ‘Coombs’ test’ 
DVET double-volume exchange transfusion 
ETCOc corrected end-tidal carbon monoxide concentration (the concentration at the 
end of an expired breath) 
GA gestational age 
GDG Guideline Development Group 
G6PD glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Lack of this enzyme (G6PD deficiency or 
G6PDD) is associated with a tendency to haemolytic disease. This can present 
in the newborn period, and can thus be associated with neonatal jaundice.  
HPLC high-performance liquid chromatography 
IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin 
LED light-emitting diode 
MD mean difference 
NICU neonatal intensive care unit 
NPV negative predictive value 
OR odds ratio 
PPV positive predictive value 
QALY quality-adjusted life year 
RMSSD root mean square of successive differences 
ROC receiver operating characteristic 
RR risk ratio 
TCB transcutaneous bilirubin 
SD standard deviation 
SD1 width of Poincaré plot images 
SD2 Length of Poincaré plot images 
SVET single-volume exchange transfusion 
TEWL trans-epidermal water loss 
TSB total serum bilirubin 
UCB umbilical cord blood bilirubin 

Neonatal jaundice 
496 
Glossary 
ABO incompatibility ABO incompatibility describes an antibody reaction that occurs when 
mother and baby have different blood groups, typically maternal 
blood group O, and baby blood group A or B. Some mothers have 
naturally occurring anti- A and anti- B antibodies present in the 
circulation, which can pass across the placenta and bind to antigenic 
sites on fetal red cell. Some mothers are sensitised by feto- maternal 
transfusion of ABO incompatible blood.. 
Acidosis A blood pH below 7.25. 
Acute bilirubin encephalopathy Acute bilirubin encephalopathy is the clinical manifestation of 
bilirubin toxicity. The clinical course is hypotonia followed by 
hypertonia, retrocollis (backward arching of the neck), or 
opisthotonos (backward arching of the back) or both. 
Albumin Albumin is one of the proteins found in blood 
Aminoglycosides Aminoglycosides are a group of antibiotics that are used to treat 
certain bacterial infections 
Apnoea Term used when a baby stops breathing for more than 20 seconds 
Basal ganglia The part of the brain affected by bilirubin neurotoxicity 
Best available evidence The strongest research evidence available to support a particular 
guideline recommendation. 
Bias Influences on a study that can lead to invalid conclusions about a 
treatment or intervention. Bias in research can make a treatment look 
better or worse than it really is. Bias can even make it look as if the 
treatment works when it actually doesn’t. Bias can occur by chance 
or as a result of systematic errors in the design and execution of a 
study. Bias can occur at different stages in the research process, e.g. 
in the collection, analysis, interpretation, publication or review of 
research data. For examples see Selection bias, Performance bias, 
Information bias, Confounding, Publication bias. 
Biliary atresia The biliary tract has not formed properly and is not patent so that 
although the liver conjugates bilirubin it cannot be excreted and so 
backflows into the bloodstream giving  rise to conjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia. A serious congenital problem which require 
urgent surgery 
Bilirubin Bilirubin is a product that results from the breakdown of 
haemoglobin 
Bilirubinometer, transcutaneous A device that used light reflectance to measure the yellow colour 
(bilirubin level) in the skin 
Bilirubinaemia Term used for the presence of bilirubin in the blood 
Blinding or masking The practice of keeping the investigators or subjects of a study 
ignorant of the group to which a subject has been assigned. For 
example, a clinical trial in which the participating patients or their 
doctors are unaware of whether they (the patients) are taking the 
experimental drug or a placebo (dummy treatment). The purpose of 
‘blinding’ or ‘masking’ is to protect against bias. See also Double 
blind study, Single blind study, Triple blind study. 
Bradycardia Term used for a slower than normal heart rate 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
497 
Case–control study A study that starts with the identification of a group of individuals 
sharing the same characteristics (e.g. people with a particular disease) 
and a suitable comparison (control) group (e.g. people without the 
disease). All subjects are then assessed with respect to things that 
happened to them in the past, e.g. things that might be related to 
getting the disease under investigation. Such studies are also called 
retrospective as they look back in time from the outcome to the 
possible causes. 
Case report (or case study) Detailed report on one patient (or case), usually covering the course 
of that person’s disease and their response to treatment. 
Case series Description of several cases of a given disease, usually covering the 
course of the disease and the response to treatment. There is no 
comparison (control) group of patients. 
Cephalo-Caudal progression This refers to the phenomenon of jaundice progressing from the head 
(cephalo) down the trunk as bilirubin level rises, eventually reaching 
the legs. Caudal refers to tail so it literally means spread from head to 
tail. 
Cephalohaematoma Collection of blood that develops beneath the outer layer of 
periosteum of a neonate's skull. Clinically, it appears as a firm, tense 
mass at birth and resolves in a few weeks to months. 
Cerebral palsy A permanent neurological disorders which affects movement 
Chalky pale stools This is a descriptive term for the pale stools that accompany 
obstructive jaundice, such as occurs in biliary atresia. Since bile is 
not excreted from the liver/bile duct into the intestine, the stools are 
paler than normal and appear chalky 
Checklist See Study checklist. 
Cholestasis Term used for a condition where bile cannot flow from the liver to 
the duodenum 
Chronic bilirubin encephalopathy Persistent brain dysfunction arising from hyperbilirubinaemia 
Chronic sequelae Persistent morbidity arising from acute events 
Clinical effectiveness The extent to which a specific treatment or intervention, when used 
under usual or everyday conditions, has a beneficial effect on the 
course or outcome of disease compared to no treatment or other 
routine care. (Clinical trials that assess effectiveness are sometimes 
called management trials) . Clinical ‘effectiveness’ is not the same as 
efficacy. 
Clinical impact The effect that a guideline recommendation is likely to have on the 
treatment, or treatment outcomes, of the target population. 
Clinical importance The importance of a particular guideline recommendation to the 
clinical management of the target population. 
Clinical question This term is sometimes used in guideline development work to refer 
to the questions about treatment and care that are formulated in order 
to guide the search for research evidence. When a clinical question is 
formulated in a precise way, it is called a focused question. 
Clinical trial  A research study conducted with patients which tests out a drug or 
other intervention to assess its effectiveness and safety. Each trial is 
designed to answer scientific questions and to find better ways to 
treat individuals with a specific disease. This general term 
encompasses controlled clinical trials and randomised controlled 
trials. 
Clinician A healthcare professional providing patient care, e.g. doctor, nurse, 
physiotherapist. 
Clofibrate A lipid lowering agent used for controlling high cholesterol and 
triacylglyceride level in the blood. 

Neonatal jaundice 
498 
Cochrane Collaboration An international organisation in which people find, appraise and 
review specific types of studies called randomised controlled trials. 
The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews contains regularly 
updated reviews on a variety of health issues and is av ailable 
electronically as part of the Cochrane Library. 
Cochrane Library The Cochrane Library consists of a regularly updated collection of 
evidence-based medicine databases including the Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews (reviews of randomised controlled trials 
prepared by the Cochrane Collaboration). The Cochrane Library is 
available on CD-ROM and the Internet. 
Cohort A group of people sharing some common characteristic (e.g. patients 
with the same disease), followed up in a research study for a 
specified period of time. 
Cohort study An observational study that takes a group (cohort) of patients and 
follows their progress over time in order to measure outcomes such 
as disease or mortality rates and make comparisons according to the 
treatments or interventions that patients received. Thus within the 
study group, subgroups of patients are identified (from information 
collected about patients) and these groups are compared with respect 
to outcome, e.g. comparing mortality between one group that 
received a specific treatment and one group which did not (or 
between two groups that received different levels of treatment). 
Cohorts can be assembled in the present and followed into the future 
(a ‘concurrent’ or ‘prospective’ cohort study) or identified from pas t 
records and followed forward from that time up to the present (a 
‘historical’ or ‘retrospective’ cohort study). Because patients are not 
randomly allocated to subgroups, these subgroups may be quite 
different in their characteristics and some adjustment must be made 
when analysing the results to ensure that the comparison between 
groups is as fair as possible. 
Combined modality Use of different treatments in combination (for example surgery, 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy used together for cancer patients). 
Co-morbidity Co-existence of a disease or diseases in the people being studied in 
addition to the health problem that is the subject of the study. 
Confidence interval A way of expressing certainty about the findings from a study or 
group of studies, using statistical techniques. A confidence interval 
describes a range of possible effects (of a treatment or intervention) 
that are consistent with the results of a study or group of studies. A 
wide confidence interval indicates a lack of certainty or precision 
about the true size of the clinical effect and is seen in studies with too 
few patients. Where confidence intervals are narrow they indicate 
more precise estimates of effects and a larger sample of patients 
studied. It is usual to interpret a ‘95%’ confidence interval as the 
range of effects within which we are 95% confident that the true 
effect lies. 
Confounder or confounding factor Something that influences a study and can contribute to misleading 
findings if it is not understood or appropriately dealt with. For 
example, if a group of people exercising regularly and a group of 
people who do not exercise have an important age difference then 
any difference found in outcomes about heart disease could well be 
due to one group being older than the other rather than due to the 
exercising. Age is the confounding factor here and the effect of 
exercising on heart disease cannot be assessed without adjusting for 
age differences in some way. 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
499 
Conjugated bilirubin A term used to describe the form of bilirubin which has been 
processed by the liver. This is otherwise described as direct bilirubin. 
Conjugated bilirubin is released into the bile by the liver and stored 
in the gallbladder, or transferred directly to the small intestines. 
Bilirubin is further broken down by  bacteria in the intestines, and 
those breakdown products contribute to the colour of the faeces. 
Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia A term used when large amounts of conjugated bilirubin appear in 
the bloodstream. 
Consensus statement A statement of the advised course of action in relation to a particular 
clinical topic, based on the collective views of a body of experts. 
Control group A group of patients recruited into a study that receives no treatment, a 
treatment of known effect, or a placebo (dummy treatme nt) - in order 
to provide a comparison for a group receiving an experimental 
treatment, such as a new drug. 
Controlled clinical trial (CCT) A study testing a specific drug or other treatment involving two (or 
more) groups of patients with the same disease. One (the 
experimental group) receives the treatment that is being tested, and 
the other (the comparison or control group) receives an alternative 
treatment, a placebo (dummy treatment) or no treatment. The two 
groups are followed up to compare differences  in outcomes to see 
how effective the experimental treatment was. A CCT where patients 
are randomly allocated to treatment and comparison groups is called 
a randomised controlled trial. 
Conventional phototherapy Phototherapy given using a single light source (not fibreoptic) that is 
positioned above the baby 
Coombs’ test See Direct Antibody Test (DAT) 
Cost benefit analysis A type of economic evaluation where both costs and benefits of 
healthcare treatment are measured in the same monetary units. If 
benefits exceed costs, the evaluation would recommend providing 
the treatment. 
Cost-minimisation analysis A form of cost- effectiveness analysis where the treatment alternatives 
are considered to be equally effective. Where treatments are equally 
effective the least costly is the most cost-effective 
Cost-effectiveness Value for money. A specific healthcare treatment is said to be ‘cost-
effective’ if it gives a greater health gain than could be achieved by 
using the resources in other ways. 
Cost-effectiveness analysis A type of economic evaluation comparing the costs and the effects on 
health of different treatments. Health effects are measured in ‘health-
related units’, for example, the cost of preventing one additional heart 
attack. 
Cross-sectional study The observation of a defined set of people at a single point in time or 
time period – a snapshot. (This type of study contrasts with a 
longitudinal study which follows a set of people over a period of 
time.) 
Data set A list of required information relating to a specific disease. 
Decision analysis Decision analysis is the study of how people make decisions or how 
they should make decisions. There are several methods that decision 
analysts use to help people to make better decisions, including 
decision trees. 

Neonatal jaundice 
500 
Decision tree A decision tree is a method for helping people to make better 
decisions in situations of uncertainty. It illustrates the decision as a 
succession of possible actions and outcomes. It consists of the 
probabilities, costs and health consequences associated with each 
option. The overall effectiveness or overall cost- effectiveness of 
different actions can then be compared. 
Declaration of interest  A process by which members of a working group or committee 
‘declare’ any personal or professional involvement with a company 
(or related to a technology) that might affect their objectivity e.g. if 
their position or department is funded by a pharmaceutical company.  
Diagnostic study A study to assess the effectiveness of a test or measurement in terms 
of its ability to accurately detect or exclude a specific disease. 
Direct Antiglobulin Test (DAT) Also known as the direct Coombs’ test; this test  is used to detect 
antibodies or complement proteins that are bound to the surface of 
red blood cells; a blood sample is taken and the RBCs are washed 
(removing the patient's own plasma) and then incubated with 
antihuman globulin (also known as ‘Coombs’ reagent’). If this 
produces agglutination of RBCs, the direct Coombs ’ test is positive, a 
visual indication that antibodies (and/or complement proteins) are 
bound to the surface of red blood cells. 
Direct bilirubin See Conjugated bilirubin 
Double blind study A study in which neither the subject (patient) nor the observer 
(investigator/clinician) is aware of which treatment or intervention the 
subject is receiving. The purpose of blinding is to protect against bias. 
Economic evaluation A comparison of alternative courses of action in terms of both their 
costs and consequences. In health economic evaluations the 
consequences should include health outcomes. 
Effectiveness See Clinical effectiveness. 
Efficacy The extent to which a specific treatment or intervention, under 
ideally controlled conditions (e.g. in a laboratory), has a beneficial 
effect on the course or outcome of disease compared to no treatment 
or other routine care. 
Empirical Based directly on experience (observation or experiment) rather than 
on reasoning alone. 
End-tidal carbon monoxide The concentration of carbon monoxide at the end of an expired breath. 
concentration 
Enteral Enteral refers to any form of administered treatment or food that 
involves the gastrointestinal tract: 
 ● by mouth (orally), many drugs as tablets, capsules, or drops 
 ● by gastric feeding tube, duodenal feeding tube, or gastrostomy 
Entero-hepatic circulation of bilirubin The uptake of bilirubin into the blood from bowel contents 
Epidemiology Study of diseases within a population, covering the causes and means 
of prevention. 
Evidence based The process of systematically finding, appraising, and using research 
findings as the basis for clinical decisions. 
Evidence based clinical practice  Evidence based clinical practice involves making decisions about the 
care of individual patients based on the best research evidence 
available rather than basing decisions on personal opinions or 
common practice (which may not always be evidence based). 
Evidence based clinical practice therefore involves integrating 
individual clinical expertise and patient preferences with the best 
available evidence from research. 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
501 
Evidence table A table summarising the results of a collection of studies which, taken 
together, represent the evidence supporting a particular 
recommendation or series of recommendations in a guideline. 
Exchange transfusion This procedure involves slowly removing the baby’s blood and 
replacing it with fresh donor blood. 
Exclusion criteria See Selection criteria. 
Experimental study A research study designed to test if a treatment or intervention has an 
effect on the course or outcome of a condition or disease - where the 
conditions of testing are to some extent under the control of the 
investigator. Controlled clinical trial and randomised controlled trial 
are examples of experimental studies. 
Experimental treatment A treatment or intervention (e.g. a new drug) being studied to see if it 
has an effect on the course or outcome of a condition or disease. 
Fibreoptic phototherapy Phototherapy given using a single light source that comprises a light 
generator, a fibre-optic cable through which the light is carried and a 
flexible light pad, on which the baby is placed or that is wrapped 
around the baby. 
Forest plot A graphical display of results from individual studies on a common 
scale, allowing visual comparison of results and examination of the 
degree of heterogeneity between studies. 
Generalisability The extent to which the results of a study hold true for a population 
of patients beyond those who participated in the research. See also 
External validity. 
Gilbert syndrome A genetic liver disorder in which the liver shows impaired processing 
of bilirubin 
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase  Lack of this enzyme ( G6PD deficiency) is associated with a tendency 
to haemolysis. This can present in the newborn period, and can thus 
be associated with neonatal jaundice. 
Gold standard A method, procedure or measurement that is widely accepted as 
being the best available. 
Grey literature Reports that are unpublished or have limited distribution, and are not 
included in bibliographic retrieval systems. 
Guideline A systematically developed tool which describes aspects of a patient’s 
condition and the care to be given. A good guideline makes 
recommendations about treatment and care, based on the best 
research available, rather than opinion. It is used to assist clinician 
and patient dec ision-making about appropriate health care for 
specific clinical conditions. 
Guideline recommendation Course of action advised by the guideline development group on the 
basis of their assessment of the supporting evidence. 
Haemoglobin The coloured pigment inside red blood cells that carries oxygen 
round the body. 
Haemolysis The breakdown of red blood cells. 
Haemolytic disease of the newborn Abnormal breakup of red blood cells in the fetus or newborn. This is 
usually due to maternal antibodies  which pass into the fetus and 
trigger haemolysis of the baby's red cells (also known as Isoimmune 
haemolytic disease) 
Health economics  A branch of economics which studies decisions about the use and 
distribution of healthcare resources. 
Health technology Health technologies include medicines, medical devices such as 
artificial hip joints, diagnostic techniques, surgical procedures, health 
promotion activities (e.g. the role of diet versus medicines in disease 
management) and other therapeutic interventions. 

Neonatal jaundice 
502 
Health Technology Appraisal (HTA) A health technology appraisal, as undertaken by NICE, is the process 
of determining the clinical and c ost-effectiveness of a health 
technology. NICE health technology appraisals are designed to 
provide patients, health professionals and managers with an 
authoritative source of advice on new and existing health 
technologies. 
Heterogeneity Or lack of homogeneity. The term is used in meta -analyses and 
systematic reviews when the results or estimates of effects of 
treatment from separate studies seem to be very different – in terms of 
the size of treatment effects or even to the extent that some indicate 
beneficial and others suggest adverse treatment effects. Such results 
may occur as a result of differences between studies in terms of th e 
patient populations, outcome measures, definition of variables or 
duration of follow-up. 
Hierarchy of evidence An established hierarchy of study types, based on the degree of 
certainty that can be attributed to the conclusions that can be drawn 
from a well conducted study. Well- conducted randomised controlled 
trials (RCTs) are at the top of this hierarchy. (Several large statistically 
significant RCTs which are in agreement represent stronger evidence 
than say one small RCT.) Well- conducted studies of patients’ views 
and experiences would appear at a lower level in the hierarchy of 
evidence. 
Homogeneity This means that the results of studies included in a systematic review 
or meta analysis are similar and there is no evidence of 
heterogeneity. Results are usually regarded as homogeneous when 
differences between studies could reasonably be expected to occur 
by chance. See also Consistency. 
Hyperbilirubinaemia Raised levels of bilirubin in the blood. 
Hyperbilirubinaemia, significant An elevation of serum bilirubin to a level requiring treatment (see key 
terms 1.1 
Hyperglycaemia Raised level of glucose in the bloodstream. 
Hyperkalaemia A high serum potassium concentration 
Hypernatraemia An electrolyte disturbance in which the sodium concentration in the 
plasma is too high 
Hyper-reflexia Overactive or over-responsive reflexes. 
Hypertonicity (hypertonia) High muscle tension, when used to describe clinical examination 
findings. 
Hypoglycaemia Lowered levels of glucose in the bloodstream. 
Hyponatraemia Lowered levels of is sodium concentration in the bloodstream 
Icterometer A tool for estimating the level of jaundice. It consists of strips of 
perspex with varying degrees of yellow colour shown in bands. 
These are placed against the baby’s skin and the colour closest to the 
baby’s skin colour is used to indicates the severity of the jaundice. 
Indirect bilirubin See Unconjugated bilirubin 
In depth interview A qualitative research technique. It is a face to face conversation 
between a researcher and a respondent with the purpose of exploring 
issues or topics in detail. Does not use pre -set questions, but is 
shaped by a defined set of topics or issues. 
Information bias Pertinent to all types of study and can be caused by inadequate 
questionnaires (e.g. difficult or biased questions), observer or 
interviewer errors (e.g. lack of blinding), response errors (e.g. lack of 
blinding if patients are aware of the treatment they receive) and 
measurement error (e.g. a faulty machine). 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
503 
Intervention Healthcare action intended to benefit the patient, e.g. drug treatment, 
surgical procedure, psychological therapy, etc. 
Interventional procedure A procedure used for diagnosis or treatment that involves making a 
cut or hole in the patient’s body, entry into a body cavity or using 
electromagnetic radiation (including X -rays or lasers). The National 
Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) has the task of producing 
guidance about whether specific interventional procedures are safe 
enough and work well enough for routine use. 
Intravenous  The giving of liquid substances intermittently or continuously, 
directly into a vein. 
Isoimmunisation The situation which occurs when fetal erythrocytes of a different 
blood group to the mother leak into her circulation during pregnancy, 
and are recognised as foreign by the maternal immune system. 
Isoimmunisation is the most common cause of severe early onset 
jaundice. See ABO incompatability, Rhesus. 
Jaundice The yellow colouration of the sclera caused by the accumulation of 
bilirubin in the skin and mucous membranes 
Jaundice, visible Jaundice detected by visual inspection 
Jaundice, prolonged Jaundice lasting more than 14 days in term babies and more than 
21 days in preterm babies (see 1.1) 
Kernicterus A term from pathology which means ‘yellow staining of the basa l 
nuclei of the brain’. This term is often used to refer to the acute and 
chronic brain effects of severe hyperbilirubinaemia. There are other 
causes of yellow staining of the brain other than jaundice. However, 
the term ioften refers to the clinical syndrome and sequelae of 
bilirubin encephalopathy 
LED (light emitting diode) phototherapy A phototherapy unit that comprises light- emitting diodes rather than 
fluorescent or halogen tubes that is positioned above the baby.. 
Level of evidence A code (e.g. 1++, 1+) linked to an individual study, indicating 
where it fits into the hierarchy of evidence and how well it has 
adhered to recognised research principles. 
Literature review A process of collecting, reading and assessing the quality of 
published (and unpublished) articles on a given topic. 
Longitudinal study A study of the same group of people at more than one point in time. 
(This type of study contrasts with a cross sectional study which 
observes a defined set of people at a single point in time.) 
Masking See Blinding. 
Meta-analysis Results from a collection of independent studies (investigating the 
same treatment) are pooled, using statistical techniques to synthesise 
their findings into a single estimate of a treatment effect. Where 
studies are not compatibl e e.g. because of differences in the study 
populations or in the outcomes measured, it may be inappropriate or 
even misleading to statistically pool results in this way. See also 
Systematic review & Heterogeneity. 
Methodology The overall approach of a research project, e.g. the study will be a 
randomised controlled trial, of 200 people, over one year. 
Methodological quality The extent to which a study has conformed to recognised good 
practice in the design and execution of its research methods. 
Multicentre study A study where subjects were selected from different locations or 
populations, e.g. a co- operative study between different hospitals; an 
international collaboration involving patients from more than one 
country. 

Neonatal jaundice 
504 
Multiple phototherapy Phototherapy that is given using more than one light source 
simultaneously; for example two or more conventional units, or a 
combination of conventional and fibreoptic units. 
Near-term 35 to 36 weeks gestational age (see key terms 1.1) 
Necrotising enterocolitis A gastrointestinal condition that mostly affects preterm babies. It 
involves infection and inflammation which causes destruction of all 
or part of the bowel (intestine) 
Neonatal Related to the first 28 days of life 
Neurotoxicity Neurotoxicity occurs when the exposure  to natural or artificial toxic 
substances, called neurotoxins, damages nerve tissue and alters its 
normal activity 
Nominal group technique A decision making method for use among groups of many sizes, who 
want to make their decision quickly, as by a vote, but want 
everyone's opinions taken into account 
Number Needed to Treat (NNT) This measures the impact of a treatment or intervention. It states how 
many patients need to be treated with the treatment in question in 
order to prevent an event which would otherwise occur. E.g. if the 
NNT=4, then 4 patients would have to be treated to prevent one bad 
outcome. The closer the NNT is to 1, the better the treatment is. 
Analogous to the NNT is the Number Needed to Harm (NNH), which 
is the number of patients that would need to receive a treatment to 
cause one additional adverse event e.g. if the NNH=4, then 4 
patients would have to be treated for one bad outcome to occur. 
Objective measure A measurement that follows a standardised procedure which is less 
open to subjective interpretation by potentially biased observers and 
study participants. 
Observation A research technique used to help understand complex situations. It 
involves watching, listening to and recording behaviours, actions, 
activities and interactions. The  settings are usually natural, but they 
can be laboratory settings, as in psychological research. 
Observational study  In research about diseases or treatments, this refers to a study in 
which nature is allowed to take its course. Changes or differences in  
one characteristic (e.g. whether or not people received a specific 
treatment or intervention) are studied in relation to changes or 
differences in other(s) (e.g. whether or not they died), without the 
intervention of the investigator. There is a greater risk of selection 
bias than in experimental studies. 
Odds ratio Odds are a way of representing probability, especially familiar for 
betting. In recent years odds ratios have become widely used in 
reports of clinical studies. They provide an estimate (usually with a 
confidence interval) for the effect of a treatment. Odds are used to 
convey the idea of ‘risk’ and an odds ratio of 1 between two 
treatment groups would imply that the risks of an adverse outcome 
were the same in each group. For rare events the odds ratio and the 
relative risk (which uses actual risks and not odds) will be very 
similar. See also Relative risk, Risk ratio. 
Outcome The end result of care and treatment and/ or rehabilitation. In other 
words, the change in health, functional ability, symptoms or situation 
of a person, which can be used to measure the effectiveness of 
care/treatment/rehabilitation. Researchers should decide what 
outcomes to measure before a study begins; outcomes are then 
assessed at the end of the study. 
Parenteral Refers to a route of treatment administration that involves giving 
drugs into body cavities, usually the blood (by intravenous infusions).  

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
505 
Patent ductus arteriosus A condition in which the connection ( the ductus) between 
pulmonary artery and aorta, which is open normally before birth, fails 
to close after birth 
Peer review Review of a study, service or recommendations by those with similar 
interests and expertise to the people who produced the study findings 
or recommendations. Peer reviewers can include professional and/ or 
patient/carer representatives. 
Phototherapy This is treatment which consists of exposure to specific wavelengths 
of light using light- emitting diodes, fluorescent lamps, dichroic lamps 
or very bright, full-spectrum light, 
Physiological jaundice Term used to describe com mon, generally harmless, jaundice seen in 
babies in the first 2 weeks of life 
Pilot study A small scale ‘test’ of the research instrument. For example, testing 
out (piloting) a new questionnaire with people who are similar to the 
population of the study, in order to highlight any problems or areas of 
concern, which can then be addressed before the full scale study 
begins. 
Placebo Placebos are dummy or inactive treatments received by participants 
allocated to the control group in a clinical trial which are 
indistinguishable from the active treatments being given in the 
experimental group. They are used so that participants are ignorant of 
their treatment allocation in order to be able to quantify the effect of 
the experimental treatment over and above any placebo effect due to 
receiving care or attention. 
Placebo effect A beneficial (or adverse) effect produced by a placebo and not due to 
any property of the placebo itself. 
Power See Statistical power. 
Preterm Less than 37 weeks gestational age (see key terms 1.1) 
Primary care Healthcare delivered to patients outside hospitals. Primary care 
covers a range of services provided by GPs, nurses and other 
healthcare professionals, dentists, pharmacists and opticians. 
Primary Care Trust A Primary Care Trust is an NHS organisation responsible for 
improving the health of local people, developing services provided 
by local GPs and their teams (called Primary Care) and making sure 
that other appropriate health services are in place to meet loca l 
people's needs. 
Prognostic factor Patient or disease characteristics, e.g. age or co- morbidity, which 
influence the course of the disease under study. In a randomised trial 
to compare two treatments, chance imbalances in variables 
(prognostic factors) that influence patient outcome are possible, 
especially if the size of the study is fairly small. In terms of analysis 
these prognostic factors become confounding factors. See also 
Prognostic marker. 
Prognostic marker A prognostic factor used to assign patients to categories for a 
specified purpose – e.g. for treatment, or as part of a clinical trial, 
according to the likely progression of the disease. For example, the 
purpose of randomisation in a clinical trial is to produce similar 
treatment groups with respect to important prognostic factors. This 
can often be achieved more efficiently if randomisation takes place 
within subgroups defined by the most important prognostic factors. 
Thus if age was very much related to patient outcome then separate 
randomisation schemes would be used for different age groups. This 
process is known as stratified random allocation. 

Neonatal jaundice 
506 
Prospective study A study in which people are entered into the research and then 
followed up over a period of time with future events recorded as the y 
happen. This contrasts with studies that are retrospective. 
Protocol A plan or set of steps which defines appropriate action. A research 
protocol sets out, in advance of carrying out the study, what question 
is to be answered and how information will be collected and 
analysed. Guideline implementation protocols set out how guideline 
recommendations will be used in practice by the NHS, both at 
national and local levels. 
Psychomotor Refers to neurological and motor develoment 
Publication bias Studies with statistically significant results are more likely to get 
published than those with non- significant results. Meta -analyses that 
are exclusively based on published literature may therefore produce 
biased results. This type of bias can be assessed by a funnel plot. 
P value If a study is done to compare two treatments then the P value is the 
probability of obtaining the results of that study, or something more 
extreme, if there really was no difference between treatments. (The 
assumption that there really is no difference between treatments is 
called the ‘null hypothesis’.) Suppose the P  value was P = 0.03. 
What this means is that if there really was no difference between 
treatments then there would only be a 3% chance of getting the kind 
of results obtained. Since this chance seems quite low we should 
question the validity of the assumption that there really is no 
difference between treatments. We would conclude that there 
probably is a difference between treatments. By convention, where 
the value of P is below 0.05 (i.e. less than 5%) the result is seen as 
statistically significant. Where the value of P  is 0.001 or less, the 
result is seen as highly significant. P values just tell us whether an 
effect can be regarded as statistically significant or not. In no way  
does the P value relate to how big the effect might be, for this we 
need the confidence interval. 
Qualitative research Qualitative research is used to explore and understand people’s 
beliefs, experiences, attitudes, behaviour and interactions. It 
generates non-numerical data, e.g. a patient’s description of their pain 
rather than a measure of pain. In health care, qualitative techniques 
have been commonly used in research documenting the experience 
of chronic illness and in studies about the functioning of 
organisations. Qualitative research techniques such as focus groups 
and in depth interviews have been used in one -off projects 
commissioned by guideline development groups to find out more 
about the views and experiences of patients and carers. 
Quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) A measure of health outcome which looks at both length of life and 
quality of life. QALYS are calculated by estimating the years of life 
remaining for a patient following a particular care pathway and 
weighting each year with a quality of life score (on a zero to one 
scale). One QALY is equal to one year of life in perfect health, or two 
years at 50% health, and so on. 
Quantitative research Research that generates numerical data or data that can be converted 
into numbers, for example clinical trials or the national Census which 
counts people and households. 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
507 
Quasi experimental study A study designed to test if a treatment or intervention has an effect on 
the course or outcome of disease. It differs from a controlled clinical 
trial and a randomised controlled trial in that:  
a) the assignment of patients to treatment and comparison groups is 
not done randomly, or patients are not given equal probabilities of 
selection, or b) the investigator does not have full control over the 
allocation and/or timing of the intervention, but nonetheless conducts 
the study as if it were an experiment, allocating subjects to treatment 
and comparison groups. 
Random allocation/Randomisation A method that uses the play of chance to assign participants to 
comparison groups in a research study, for example, by using a 
random numbers table or a computer -generated random sequence. 
Random allocation implies that each individual (or each unit in the 
case of cluster randomisation) being entered into a study has the  
same chance of receiving each of the possible interventions. 
Randomised controlled trial A study to test a specific drug or other treatment in which people are 
randomly assigned to two (or more) groups: one (the experimental 
group) receiving the treatment that is being tested, and the other (the 
comparison or control group) receiving an alternative treatment, a 
placebo (dummy treatment) or no treatment. The two groups are 
followed up to compare differences in outcomes to see how effective 
the experimental treatment was. (Through randomisation, the groups 
should be similar in all aspects apart from the treatment they receive 
during the study.) 
Receiver operating characteristic curve A curve can be used to evaluate the goodness of fit for a binary 
classifier. It is a plot of the true positive rate (rate of events that are 
correctly predicted as events) against the false positive rate (rate of 
nonevents predicted to be events) for the different possible cutpoints 
Retrospective study A retrospective study deals with the present/past and does not involve 
studying future events. This contrasts with studies that are 
prospective. 
Review Summary of the main points and trends in the research literature on a 
specified topic. A review is considered non- systematic unless an 
extensive literature search has been carried out to ensure that all 
aspects of the topic are covered and an objective appraisal made of 
the quality of the studies. 
Rhesus A blood group system which comprises the Rhesus antigens 
Riboflavin Vitamin B2 
Risk ratio Ratio of the risk of an undesirable event or outcome occurring in a 
group of patients receiving experimental treatment compared with a 
comparison (control) group. The term relative risk is sometimes used 
as a synonym of risk ratio. 
Royal Colleges In the UK medical/nursing world the term royal colleges, as for 
example in ‘The Royal College of….’, refers to organisations which 
usually combine an educational standards and examination role with 
the promotion of professional standards. 
Safety netting The provision of support for patients in whom the clinician has some 
uncertainty as to whether the patient has a self- limiting illness and is 
concerned that their condition may deteriorate. Safety netting may 
take a number of forms, such as dialogue with the patient or carer 
about symptoms and signs to watch for, advice about when to seek 
further medical attention, review after a set period, and liaising with 
other healthcare services 
Sclerae The whites of the eyes (singular sclera) 

Neonatal jaundice 
508 
Sample A part of the study’s target population from which the subjects of the 
study will be recruited. If subjects are drawn in an unbiased way from 
a particular population, the results can be generalised from the 
sample to the population as a whole. 
Sampling Refers to the way participants are selected for inclusion in a study. 
Sampling frame A list or register of names which is used to recruit participants to a 
study. 
Secondary care Care provided in hospitals. 
Selection bias Selection bias has occurred if, the characteristics of the  sample differ 
from those of the wider population from which the sample has been 
drawn or there are systematic differences between comparison 
groups of patients in a study in terms of prognosis or responsiveness 
to treatment. 
Selection criteria Explicit standards used by guideline development groups to decide 
which studies should be included and excluded from consideration 
as potential sources of evidence. 
Semi-structured interview Structured interviews involve asking people pre -set questions. A 
semi-structured interview allows more flexibility than a structured 
interview. The interviewer asks a number of open- ended questions, 
following up areas of interest in response to the information given by 
the respondent. 
Sensitivity In diagnostic testing, it refers to the chance of having a positive test 
result given that you have the disease. 100% sensitivity means that all 
those with the disease will test positive, but this is not the same the 
other way around. A patient could have a positive test result but not 
have the disease – this is called a ‘false positive’. The sensitivity of a 
test is also related to its ‘negative predictive value’ (true negatives) – a 
test with a sensitivity of 100% means that all those who get a 
negative test result do not have the disease. To fully judge the 
accuracy of a test, its Specificity must also be considered. 
Sensorineural deafness A type of hearing loss in which the root cause lies in the 
vestibulocochlear nerve (Cranial nerve VIII), the inner ear, or central 
processing centers of the brain. 
Serum A fluid component of clotted blood that lacks clotting factors and 
other elements which plasma includes. It retains antibodies, 
electrolytes and soluble proteins. In this guideline, when referring to 
bilirubin measurements on blood made on spun- down blood 
samples, sderum is also used to refer to plasma. 
Single blind study A study in which either the subject (patient/participant) or the 
observer (clinician/investigator) is not aware of which treatment or 
intervention the subject is receiving. 
Single phototherapy Phototherapy given using a single light source. 
Specificity In diagnostic testing, it refers to the chance of having a negative test 
result given that you do not have the disease. 100% specificity means 
that all those without the disease will test negative, but this is not the 
same the other way around. A patient could have a negative test 
result yet still have the disease – this is called a ‘false negative’. The 
specificity of a test is also related to its ‘positive predictive value’ (true 
positives) – a test with a specificity of 100% means that all those who 
get a positive test result definitely have the disease. To fully judge the 
accuracy of a test, its Sensitivity must also be considered. 
Split bilirubin Laboratory test measuring conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin. 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
509 
Standard deviation A measure of the spread, scatter or variability of a set of 
measurements. Usually used with the mean (average) to describe 
numerical data. 
Statistical power The ability of a study to demonstrate an association or causal 
relationship between two variables, given that an association exists. 
For example, 80% power in a clinical trial means that the study has a 
80% chance of ending up with a P value of less than 5% in a 
statistical test (i.e. a statistically significant treatment effect) if there 
really was an important difference (e.g. 10% versus 5% mortality) 
between treatments. If the statistical power of a study is low, the 
study results will be questionable (the study might have been too 
small to detect any differences). By convention, 80% is an acceptable 
level of power. See also P value. 
Sternum The breastbone. For the purposes of the guideline we are specifically 
referring to the section of the skin and chest wall overlying the 
breastbone. 
Stools Term used for faeces or poo. 
Structured interview A research technique where the interviewer controls the interview by 
adhering strictly to a questionnaire or interview schedule with pre -set 
questions. 
Study checklist A list of questions addressing the key aspects of the research 
methodology that must be in place if a study is to be accepted as 
valid. A different checklist is required for each study type. These 
checklists are used to ensure a degree of consistency in the way that 
studies are evaluated. 
Study population People who have been identified as the subjects of a study. 
Study quality See Methodological quality. 
Study type The kind of design used for a study. Randomised controlled trial, 
case–control study, cohort study are all examples of study types. 
Subject A person who takes part in an experiment or research study. 
Survey A study in which information is systematically collected from people 
(usually from a sample within a defined population). 
Systematic Methodical, according to plan; not random. 
Systematic error Refers to the various errors or biases inherent in a study. See also 
Bias. 
Systematic review A review in which evidence from scientific studies has been 
identified, appraised and synthesised in a methodical way according 
to predetermined criteria. May or may not include a meta-analysis. 
Systemic Involving the whole body. 
Tachycardia Rapid heart-rate. 
Tachypnoea Rapid breathing. 
Target population The people to whom guideline recommendations are intended to 
apply. Recommendations may be less valid if applied to a population 
with different characteristics from the participants in the research 
study – e.g. in terms of age, disease state, social background. 
Term 37 weeks or more of pregnancy. For the purposes of this guideline 
babies of 27 weeks are considered differently to those of 38 weeks. 
Tertiary centre A major medical centre providing complex treatments which receives 
referrals from both primary and secondary care. Sometimes called a 
tertiary referral centre. See also Primary care and Secondary care. 
Thermo-neutral environment Surroundings of an ambient temperature which minimizes the baby’s 
energy expenditure on keeping warm or cool 
Transcutaneous Passing, entering, or made by penetration through the skin 

Neonatal jaundice 
510 
Transepidermal Passes across the epid ermal layer (skin) to the surrounding 
atmosphere via diffusion and evaporation processes. 
Triple blind study A study in which the statistical analysis is carried out without 
knowing which treatment patients received, in addition to the 
patients and investigators/clinicians being unaware which treatment 
patients were getting. 
Unconjugated bilirubin  This is the term used to describe bilirubin which has not been 
processed by the liver. Normally unconjugated bilirubin is taken up 
by the liver where an enzyme p roduces conjugated bilirubin. It is 
then transported by the biliary system to the intestine and excreted.  
 Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia arises if the liver cannot handle 
the amount of unconjugated bilirubin presented to it. This can occur 
as a result o f excessive red blood cell breakdown – (haemolysis) 
and/or because of immaturity of the liver enzymes involved in 
conjugation. 
Univariate analysis Analysis of data on a single variable at a time 
Urinary tract infection A bacterial infection that affects any part of the urinary tract. 
Validity Assessment of how well a tool or instrument measures what it is 
intended to measure. See also External validity, Internal validity.  
Variable A measurement that can vary within a study, e.g. the age of 
participants. Variability is present when differences can be seen 
between different people or within the same person over time, with 
respect to any characteristic or feature which can be assessed or 
measured. 
Vasodilator effects Refers to widening of blood vessels 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
511 
References 
1.  Rennie JM, Seghal A, De A  et al.  Range of UK practice regarding thresholds for phototherapy and exchange transfusion in 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2009; 94: F323-F327. 
2.  NHS Executive. Clinical Guidelines: Using Clinical Guidelines to Improve Patient Care Within the NHS. London: HMSO; 1996. 
3.  Oxman AD, Sackett DL, and Guyatt GH. Users' guide to the medical literature. I. How to get started. JAMA: the journal o f the 
American Medical Association 1993; 270:(17)2093-5. 
4.  Guyatt GH, Sackett DL, and Cook DJ. Users' guides to the medical literature. II. How to use an article about therapy or 
prevention. A. Are the results of the study valid? Evidence -Based Medicine Working Group. JAMA: the journal of the American 
Medical Association 1993; 270:(21)2598-601. 
5.  Guyatt GH, Sackett DL, and Cook DJ. Users' guides to the medical literature. II. How to use an article about therapy or 
prevention. B. What were the results an d will they help me in caring for my patients? Evidence -Based Medicine Working Group. 
JAMA: the journal of the American Medical Association 1994; 271:(1)59-63. 
6.  Jaeschke R, Guyatt G, and Sackett DL. Users' guides to the medical literature. III. How to u se an article about a diagnostic test. A. 
Are the results of the study valid? Evidence -Based Medicine Working Group. JAMA: the journal of the American Medical 
Association 1994; 271:(5)389-91. 
7.  Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, and Sackett DL. Users' guides to the medical literature. III. How to use an article about a diagnostic test. 
B. What are the results and will they help me in caring for my patients? The Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. JAMA: the 
journal of the American Medical Association 1994; 271:(9)703-7. 
8.  National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. The guidelines manual 2006. London: NICE; 2006. 
9.  Newman TB, Xiong B, Gonzales VM  et al. Prediction and prevention of extreme neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in a mature health 
maintenance organization. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 2000; 154:(11)1140-7. 
10.  Newman TB, Liljestrand P, and Escobar GJ. Jaundice noted in the first 24 hours after birth in a managed care organization. 
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 2002; 156:(12)1244-50. 
11.  Kuzniewicz MW, Escobar GJ, Wi S et al. Risk factors for severe hyperbilirubinemia among infants with borderline bilirubin levels: 
a nested case-control study. Journal of Pediatrics 2008; 153:(2)234-40. 
12.  Keren R, Bhutani VK, Lu an X  et al.  Identifying newborns at risk of significant hyperbilirubinaemia: a comparison of two 
recommended approaches. Archives of Disease in Childhood 2005; 90:(4)415-21. 
13.  Seidman DS, Ergaz Z, Paz I  et al. Predicting the risk of jaundice in full -term healthy newborns: a prospective population -based 
study. Journal of Perinatology 1999; 19:(8 Pt 1)564-7. 
14.  Keren R, Luan X, Friedman S  et al.  A comparison of alternative risk -assessment strategies for predicting significant neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia in term and near-term infants. Pediatrics 2008; 121:(1)e170-e179. 
15.  Gale R, Seidman DS, Dollberg S  et al.  Epidemiology of neonatal jaundice in the Jerusalem population. Journal of Pediatric 
Gastroenterology and Nutrition 1990; 10:(1)82-6. 
16.  Khoury MJ, Calle EE, and Joesoef RM. Recurrence risk of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in siblings. American Journal of Diseases of 
Children 1988; 142:(10)1065-9. 
17.  Maisels MJ, DeRidder J.M., and Kring EA. Routine transcutaneous bilirubin measurements combined with clinical risk factors 
improve the prediction of subsequent hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Perinatology 2009; 29:612-7. 
18.  Beal AC, Chou SC, Palmer RH  et al. The changing face of race: risk factors for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics  2006; 
117:(5)1618-25. 
19.  American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Hyperbilirubinemia. Management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 
35 or more weeks of gestation.[see comment][erratum appears in Pediatrics. 2004 Oct;114(4):1138]. Pediatrics  2004; 114:(1)297-
316. 
20.  Bhutani VK and Johnson L. Kernicterus in late preterm infants cared for as term healthy infants. Seminars in Perinatology 2006; 
30:(2)89-97. 
21.  Turkel SB, Guttenberg ME, Moynes DR et al. Lack of identifiable risk factors for kernicterus. Pediatrics 1980; 66:(4)502-6. 
22.  Murki S, Kumar P, Majumdar S  et al. Risk factors for kernicterus in term babies with non -hemolytic jaundice. Indian Pediatrics  
2001; 38:(7)757-62. 
23.  Newman TB and Klebanoff MA. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and long-term outcome: another look at the Collaborative Perinatal 
Project.[see comment]. Pediatrics 1993; 92:(5)651-7. 
24.  Oh W, Tyson JE, Fanaroff AA  et al. Association between peak serum bilirubin and neurodevelopmental outcomes in extremely 
low birth weight infants. Pediatrics 2003; 112:(4)773-9. 
25.  Boo NY, Oakes M, Lye MS et al. Risk factors associated with hearing loss in term neonates with hyperbilirubinaemia. Journal of 
Tropical Pediatrics 1994; 40:(4)194-7. 
26.  Carbonell X, Botet F, Figueras J  et al. Prediction of hyperbilirubinaemia in the healthy term newborn. Acta Paediatrica  2001; 
90:(2)166-70. 
27.  Agarwal R, Kaushal M, Aggarwal R et al. Early neonatal hyperbilirubinemia using first day serum bilirubin level. Indian Pediatrics 
2002; 39:(8)724-30. 
28.  Alpay F, Sarici SU, Tosuncuk HD  et al. The value of first-day bilirubin measurement in predicting the development of significant 
hyperbilirubinemia in healthy term newborns. Pediatrics 2000; 106:(2)E16. 
29.  Knudsen A. Prediction of later hyperbilirubinaemia by measurement of skin colour on the first postnatal day and from cord blood 
bilirubin. Danish Medical Bulletin 1992; 39:(2)193-6. 
30.  Knupfer M, Pulzer F, Gebauer C  et al. Predictive value of umbilical cord blood bilirubin for postnatal hyperbilirubinaemia. Acta 
Paediatrica 2005; 94:(5)581-7. 
31.
  Taksande A, Vilhekar K, Jain M  et al. Prediction of the development of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia by increased umbilical cord 
blood bilirubin. Current Pediatric Research 2005; 9:(1-2)5-2. 
32.  Stevenson DK, Fanaroff AA, Maisels MJ  et al. Prediction of hyperbilirubinemia in near -term and term infants. Pediatrics  2001; 
108:(1)31-9. 

Neonatal jaundice 
512 
33.  Okuyama H, Yonetani M, Uetani Y et al. End-tidal carbon monoxide is predictive for neonatal non-hemolytic hyperbilirubinemia. 
Pediatrics International 2001; 43:(4)329-33. 
34.  Bhutani VK, Johnson L, and Sivieri EM. Predictive ability of a predischarge hour-specific serum bilirubin for subsequent significant 
hyperbilirubinemia in healthy term and near-term newborns. Pediatrics 1999; 103:(1)6-14. 
35.  Newman TB, Liljestrand P, and Escobar GJ. Combining clinical risk factors with serum bilirubin levels to predict 
hyperbilirubinemia in newborns. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 2005; 159:(2)113-9. 
36.  Bhutani VK, Gourley GR, Adler S et al. Noninvasive measurement of total serum bilirubin in a multiracial predischarge newborn 
population to assess the risk of severe hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics 2000; 106:(2)E17. 
37.  Romagnoli C, De L, Zuppa AA  et al.  Could early serum bilirubin measurement be useful in predicting non physiologic 
hyperbilirubinemia? Italian Journal of Pediatrics 2005; 31:(1)52-60. 
38.  Meberg A and Johansen KB. Screening for neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and ABO alloimmunization at the time of testing for 
phenylketonuria and congenital hypothyreosis. Acta Paediatrica 1998; 87:(12)1269-74. 
39.  Sarici SU, Yurdakok M, Serdar MA  et al.  An early (sixth -hour) serum bilirubin measurement is useful in predicting the 
development of significant hyperbilirubinemia and severe ABO hemolytic disease in a selective high -risk population of newborns 
with ABO incompatibility. Pediatrics 2002; 109:(4)e53. 
40.  Chen JY and Ling UP. Prediction of the development of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in ABO incompatibility. Chung Hua i  Hsueh 
Tsa Chih - Chinese Medical Journal 1994; 53:(1)13-8. 
41.  Herschel M, Karrison T, Wen M  et al. Evaluation of the direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test for identifying newborns at risk for 
hemolysis as determined by end-tidal carbon monoxide concentration (ETCOc); and comparison of the Coombs' test with ETCOc 
for detecting significant jaundice. Journal of Perinatology 2002; 22:(5)341-7. 
42.  Risemberg HM, Mazzi E, MacDonald MG  et al.  Correlation of cord bilirubin levels with hyperbilirubinaemia in ABO 
incompatibility. Archives of Disease in Childhood 1977; 52:(3)219-22. 
43.  Petersen JR, Okorodudu AO, Mohammad AA  et al. Association of transcutaneous bilirubin testing in hospital with decreased 
readmission rate for hyperbilirubinemia. Clinical Chemistry 2005; 51:(3)540-4. 
44.  Samanta S, Tan M, Kissack C et al. The value of Bilicheck as a screening tool for neonatal jaundice in term and near -term babies. 
Acta Paediatrica 2004; 93:(11)1486-90. 
45.  Ebbesen F, Rasmussen LM, and Wimberley PD. A new transcutane ous bilirubinometer, BiliCheck, used in the neonatal intensive 
care unit and the maternity ward. Acta Paediatrica, International Journal of Paediatrics 2002; 91:(2)-211. 
46.  Briscoe L, Clark S, and Yoxall CW. Can transcutaneous bilirubinometry reduce the need for blood tests in jaundiced full term 
babies? Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2002; 86:(3)F190-F192. 
47.  Bhutani VK, Johnson LH, Schwoebel A  et al.  A systems approach for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in term and near -term 
newborns. JOGNN: Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing 2006; 35:(4)444-55. 
48.  Eggert LD, Wiedmeier SE, Wilson J et al. The effect of instituting a prehospital -discharge newborn bilirubin screening program in 
an 18-hospital health system. Pediatrics 2006; 117:(5)e855-e862. 
49.  Madan A, Huntsinger K, Burgos A  et al. Readmission for newborn jaundice: the value of the Coombs' test in predicting the need 
for phototherapy. Clinical Pediatrics 2004; 43:(1)63-8. 
50.  Madlon-Kay DJ. Identifying ABO incompatibility in newborns: Selective vs automatic testing. Journal of Family Practice  1992; 
35:(3)278-80. 
51.  Leistikow EA, Collin MF, Savastano GD et al. Wasted health care dollars: Routine cord blood type and Coombs' testing. Archives 
of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 1995; 149:(10)1147-51. 
52.  Kramer LI. Advancement of dermal icterus in the jaundiced newborn. American Journal of Diseases of Children 1969; 118:(3)454-
8. 
53.  Finlay HVL and Tucker SM. Neonatal plasma bilirubin chart. Archives of Disease in Childhood 2009; 53:(1)90. 
54.  Maayan-Metzger A, Schwartz T, Sulkes J et al. Maternal anti-D prophylaxis during pregnancy does not cause neonatal haemolysis. 
Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2001; 84:(1)F60-F62. 
55.  Szabo P, Wolf M, Bucher HU  et al. Assessment of jaundice in preterm neonates: comparison between clinical assessment, two 
transcutaneous bilirubinometers and serum bilirubin values. Acta Paediatrica 2004; 93:(11)1491-5. 
56.  Szabo P, Wolf M, Bucher HU  et al. Detection of hyperbilirubinaemia in jaundiced full -term neonates by eye or by 
bilirubinometer? European Journal of Pediatrics 2004; 163:(12)722-7. 
57.  Madlon-Kay DJ. Recognition of the presence and severity of newborn jaundice by parents, nurses, phys icians, and icterometer. 
Pediatrics 1997; 100:(3)E3. 
58.  Riskin A, Kugelman A, bend -Weinger M  et al. In the eye of the beholder: how accurate is clinical estimation of jaundice in 
newborns? Acta Paediatrica 2003; 92:(5)574-6. 
59.  Madlon-Kay DJ. Home health nurse clinical assessment of neonatal jaundice: comparison of 3 methods. Archives of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine 2001; 155:(5)583-6. 
60.  Moyer VA, Ahn C, and Sneed S. Accuracy of clinical judgment in neonatal jaundice. Archives of Pediatrics and  Adolescent 
Medicine 2000; 154:(4)391-4. 
61.  Riskin A, Tamir A, Kugelman A  et al. Is visual assessment of jaundice reliable as a screening tool to detect significant neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia? Journal of Pediatrics 2 008; 2008 Jun;152:(6)782- 7. 
62.  Crofts DJ, Michel VJ, Rigby AS  et al. Assessment of stool colour in community management of prolonged jaundice in infancy. 
Acta Paediatrica 1999; 88:(9)969-74. 
63.  Chaibva NT, Fenner A, and Wolfsdorf J. Reliability of an icterometer in Black neonates with hyperbilirubinaemia. South African 
Medical Journal 1974; Suid-Afrikaanse Tydskrif Vir Geneeskunde. 48:(36)1533-4. 
64.  Hamel BCJ. Usefulness of icterometer in black newborns with jaundice. Tropical Doctor 1982; 12:(4 II)213-4. 
65.  Merritt KA and Coulter DM. Application of the Gosset icterometer to screen for clinically significant hyperbilirubinemia in 
premature infants. Journal of Perinatology 1994; 14:(1)58-65. 
66.  Bilgen H, Ince Z, Ozek E et al. Transcutaneous measurement of hyperbilirubinaemia: comparison of the Minolta jaundice meter 
and the Ingram icterometer. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics 1998; 18:(4)325-8. 
67.  Tsai LT and Lu CC. Clinical evaluation of transcutaneous jaundice meter in full-term newborns. Chung-Hua Min Kuo Hsiao Erh Ko 
i Hsueh Hui Tsa Chih 1988; 29:(6)376-82. 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
513 
68.  Maisels MJ and Conrad S. Transcutaneous bilirubin measurements in full-term infants. Pediatrics 1982; 70:(3)464-7. 
69.  Karrar Z, al HS, al Basit OB  et al. Transcutaneous bilirubin measurements in Saudi infants: the use of the jaundice meter to 
identify significant jaundice. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics 1989; 9:(1)59-61. 
70.  Knudsen A and Brodersen R. Skin colour and bilirubin in neonates. Archives of Disease in Childhood 1989; 64:(4)605-9. 
71.  Maisels MJ, Ostrea J, Touch S et al. Evaluation of a new transcutaneous bilirubinometer. Pediatrics 2004; 113:(6 I)1628-35. 
72.  Engle WD, Jackson GL, Stehel EK  et al. Evaluation of a transcutaneous jaundice meter following hospital discharge in term and 
near-term neonates. Journal of Perinatology 2005; 25:(7)486-90. 
73.  Schmidt ET, Wheeler CA, and Jackson GL. Evaluation of transcutaneous bilirubinometry in preterm neonates. Journal of 
Perinatology 2009; 29:564-9. 
74.  Sanpavat S and Nuchprayoon I. Noninvasive transcutaneous bilirubi n as a screening test to identify the need for serum bilirubin 
assessment. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 2004; 87:(10)1193-8. 
75.  Sanpavat S and Nuchprayoon I. Transcutaneous bilirubin in the pre- term infants. Journal of the Medical Assoc iation of Thailand 
2007; 90:(9)1803-8. 
76.  Chang YH, Hsieh WS, Chou HC et al. The effectiveness of a noninvasive transcutaneous bilirubin meter in reducing the need for 
blood sampling in Taiwanese neonates. Clinical Neonatology 2006; 13:(2)60-3. 
77.  Rubaltelli FF, Gourley GR, Loskamp N  et al. Transcutaneous bilirubin measurement: A multicenter evaluation of a new device. 
Pediatrics 2001; 107:(6)1264-71. 
78.  Boo NY and Ishak S. Prediction of severe hyperbilirubinaemia using the Bilicheck transcutaneous bi lirubinometer. Journal of 
Paediatrics and Child Health 2007; 43:(4)297-302. 
79.  De Luca D, Zecca E, de T urris P et al. Using BiliCheck for preterm neonates in a sub- intensive unit: diagnostic usefulness and 
suitability. Early Human Development 2007; 83:(5)313-7. 
80.  Slusher TM, Angyo IA, Bode -Thomas F  et al.  Transcutaneous bilirubin measurements and serum total bilirubin levels in 
indigenous African infants. Pediatrics 2004; 113:(6)1636-41. 
81.  Karon BS, Teske A, Santrach PJ  et al. Evaluation of the BiliChek noninvasive bilirubin analyzer for prediction of serum bilirubin 
and risk of hyperbilirubinemia. American Journal of Clinical Pathology 2008; 130:(6)976-82. 
82.  Azubuike JC. Neonatal jaundice in eastern Nigeria. East African Medical Journal 1979; 56:(7)320-4. 
83.  Werblinska B, Stankiewicz H, and Oduloju MO. Neonatal jaundice in Zaria, Northern Nigeria. Nigerian Journal of Paediatrics  
1981; 8:(1)3-10. 
84.  Singhal PK, Singh M, Paul VK  et al. Spectrum of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia: an analysis of 454 cases. Indian Pediatrics 1992; 
29:(3)319-25. 
85.  Sodeinde O, Chan MC, Maxwell SM  et al. Neonatal jaundice, aflatoxins and naphthols: report of a study in Ibadan, Nigeria. 
Annals of Tropical Paediatrics 1995; 15:(2)107-13. 
86.  Bhandari A, Crowell EB, Crow ell S  et al.  Incidence of glucose -6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in jaundiced punjabi 
neonates. Indian Journal of Pathology and Microbiology 1982; 25:(4)279-82. 
87.  Bajpai PC, Misra PK, Agarwal M  et al. An etiological study of neonatal hyperbilirubi naemia. Indian Journal of Pediatrics  1971; 
38:(286)424-9. 
88.  Arif K and Bhutta ZA. Risk factors and spectrum of neonatal jaundice in a birth cohort in Karachi. Indian Pediatrics  1999; 
36:(5)487-93. 
89.  Guaran RL, Drew JH, and Watkins AM. Jaundice: clinical practice in 88,000 liveborn infants. Australian and New Zealand Journal 
of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 1992; 32:(3)186-92. 
90.  Yeung CY. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in Chinese. Tropical and Geographical Medicine 1973; 25:(2)151-7. 
91.  Mamtani M, Patel  A, Renge R  et al.  Prognostic value of direct bilirubin in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Indian Journal of 
Pediatrics 2007; 74:(9)819-22. 
92.  Ahmed H, Yukubu AM, and Hendrickse RG. Neonatal jaundice in Zaria, Nigeria-- a second prospective study. West Afric an 
Journal of Medicine 1995; 14:(1)15-23. 
93.  Seidman DS, Stevenson DK, Ergaz Z  et al. Hospital readmission due to neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics  1995; 96:(4 Pt 
1)727-9. 
94.  Effiong CE, Aimaku VE, Bienzle U  et al. Neonatal jaundice in Ibadan. Incidence and etiologic factors in babies born in hospital. 
Journal of the National Medical Association 1975; 67:(3)208-13. 
95.  Biddulph J and Woodfield DG. Survey of neonatal jaundice in Port Moresby. Papua New Guinea Medical Journal  1974; 
17:(4)364-72. 
96.  Ho NK. Neonatal jaundice. A second 4 -year experience in Toa Payoh Hospital (1986 -1989). Journal of the Singapore Paediatric 
Society 1991; 33:(3-4)149-55. 
97.  Tay JSH, Low PS, Wong HB et al. Value and limitations of bilirubin binding capacity in predicting the development of kernicterus. 
Australian Paediatric Journal 1984; 20:(1)63-6. 
98.  C hen W and Shih JS. Etiological factors and clinical aspects of Chinese neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Acta Paediatrica Sinica 1981; 
22:(3)141-9. 
99.  Atay E, Bozaykut A, and Ipek IO. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in neonatal indirect hyperbilirubinemia. Journal 
of Tropical Pediatrics 2006; 52:(1)56-8. 
100.  Koosha A and Rafizadeh B. Evaluation of neonatal indirect hyperbilirubinaemia at Zanjan Province of Iran in 2001- 2003: 
prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Singapore Medical Journal 2007; 48:(5)424-8. 
101.  Dawodu A, Qureshi MM, Moustafa IA et al. Epidemiology of clinical hyperbilirubinaemia in Al Ain, United Arab Emirates. Annals 
of Tropical Paediatrics 1998; 18:(2)93-9. 
102.  Al-Omran A, Al-Ghazal F, Gupta S et al. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and neonatal jaundice in Al -Hofuf area. 
Annals of Saudi Medicine 1999; 19:(2)156-8. 
103.  Narang A, Gathwala G, and Kumar P. Neonatal jaundice: an analysis of 551 cases. Indian Pediatrics 1997; 34:(5)429-32. 
104.  Nkrumah FK. Severe neonatal jaundice. Analysis of possible associated factors in infants from Accra. Ghana Medical Journal  
1973; 12:(2)160-5. 

Neonatal jaundice 
514 
105.  Dawodu AH, Owa JA , and Familusi JB. A prospective study of the role of bacterial infection and G6PD deficiency in severe 
neonatal jaundice in Nigeria. Tropical and Geographical Medicine 1984; 36:(2)127-32. 
106.  Manning D, Todd P, Maxwell M et al. Prospective surveillance study of severe hyperbilirubinaemia in the newborn in the UK and 
Ireland. Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2007; 92:(5)F342-F346. 
107.  Katar S, Akay HO, Taskesen M  et al. Clinical and cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) fin dings of 21 patients with serious 
hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Child Neurology 2008; 23:(4)415-7. 
108.  Tiker F, Gulcan H, Kilicdag H et al. Extreme hyperbilirubinemia in newborn infants. Clinical Pediatrics 2006; 45:(3)257-61. 
109.  Necheles TF, Rai US, and VALAES T. The role of haemolysis in neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia as reflected in carboxyhaemoglobin 
levels. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 1976; 65:(3)361-7. 
110.  Bjerre JV, Petersen JR, and Ebbesen F. Surveillance of extreme hyperbilirubinaemia in De nmark. A method to identify the 
newborn infants. Acta Pædiatrica 2008; 97:1030-4. 
111.  Sgro M, Campbell D, and Shah V. Incidence and causes of severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in Canada. Canadian Medical 
Association Journal 2006; 175:(6)587-90. 
112.  Ogunlesi TA, Dedeke IO, Adekanmbi AF  et al. The incidence and outcome of bilirubin encephalopathy in Nigeria: a bi -centre 
study. Nigerian Journal of Medicine: Journal of the National Association of Resident Doctors of Nigeria 2007; 16:(4)354-9. 
113.  Maisels MJ and Newman TB. Kernicterus in otherwise healthy, breast-fed term newborns. Pediatrics 1995; 96:(4 Pt 1)730-3. 
114.  Hulzebos CV, van Imhoff DE, Bos AF et al. Usefulness of the bilirubin/albumin ratio for predicting bilirubin-induced neurotoxicity 
in premature infants. [41 refs]. Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2008; 93:(5)F384-F388. 
115.  Malik GK, Goel GK, Vishwanathan PN  et al.  Free and erythrocyte -bound bilirubin in neonatal jaundice. Acta Paediatrica 
Scandinavica 1986; 75:(4)545-9. 
116.  Chan G, Ilkiw R, and Schiff D. Clinical relevance of the plasma reserve albumin binding capacity for bilirubin (RABC) and "fr ee" 
bilirubin concentration. Clinical Biochemistry 1980; 13:(6)292-4. 
117.  de Carvalho WB, Kopelman BI, and de Araujo PS. Correlation between free bilirubin and indirect bilirubin in normal newborn 
infants with non -hemolytic jaundice and effect of hemolysis on free bilirubin measurement by the peroxidase method. Revista 
Paulista de Medicina 1992; 110:(3)138-44. 
118.  Newman TB, Hope S, and Stevenson DK. Direct bilirubin measurements in jaundiced term newborns. A reevaluation. American 
Journal of Diseases of Children 1991; 145:(11)1305-9. 
119.  Newman TB, Easterling J, Goldman ES et al. Laboratory evaluation of jaundice in newborns. Frequency, cost, and yield. American 
Journal of Diseases of Children 1990; 144:(3)364-8. 
120.  Unal S, Koc E, Aktas A  et al. Prolonged jaundice in newborns: What is it actually due to? Gazi Medical Journal  2003; 14:(4)147-
51. 
121.  Tiker F, Tarcan A, Kilicdag H  et al. Early onset conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in newborn infants. Indian Journal of Pediatrics  
2006; 73:(5)409-12. 
122.  Hannam S, McDonnell M, and Rennie JM. Investigation of prolonged neonatal jaundice. Acta Paediatrica 2000; 89:(6)694-7. 
123.   Practice parameter: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the healthy term newborn. American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Provisional Committee for Quality Improvement and Subcommittee on Hyperbilirubinemia.[Erratum appears in Pediatrics 1995 
Mar;95(3):458-61]. Pediatrics 1994; 94:(4 Pt 1)558-65. 
124.  Burke BL, Robbins JM, Bird TM et al. Trends in Hospitalizations for Neonatal Jaundice and Kernicterus in the United States, 1988-
2005. Pediatrics 2009; 123:(2)524-32. 
125.  Barak M, Berger I, Dollberg S et al. When should phototherapy be stopped? A pilot study comparing two targets of serum bilirubin 
concentration. Acta Paediatrica 2009; 98:(2)277-81. 
126.  Kaplan M, Kaplan E, Hammerman C  et al.  Post-phototherapy neonatal bilirubin rebound: a potential  cause of significant 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Archives of Disease in Childhood 2006; 91:(1)31-4. 
127.   Guidelines for detection, management and prevention of hyperbilirubinemia in term and late preterm newborn infants (35 or 
more weeks' gestation). [French, English]. Paediatrics and Child Health 2007; 12:(SUPPL. B)1b-24b. 
128.  Kaplan M, Merlob P, and Regev R. Israel guidelines for the management of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and prevention of 
kernicterus. Journal of Perinatology 2008; 28:(6)389-97. 
129.   N ational Institute of Child Health and Human Development randomized, controlled trials of phototherapy for neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics 1985; 75:(2 Pt 2)385-441. 
130.  Sisson TR, Kendall N, Glauser SC  et al. Phototherapy of jaundice in newborn infant. I. ABO blood group incompatibility. Journal 
of Pediatrics 1971; 79:(6)904-10. 
131.  Lewis HM, Campbell RH, and Hambleton G. Use or abuse of phototherapy for physiological jaundice of newborn infants. Lancet  
1982; 2:(8295)408-10. 
132.  Meloni T, Costa S, Dore A et al. Phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in mature newborn infants with erythrocyte G -6-
PD deficiency. Journal of Pediatrics 1974; 85:(4)560-2. 
133.  Martinez JC, Maisels MJ, Otheguy L  et al. Hyperbilirubinemia in the breast-fed newborn: A controlled trial of four interventions. 
Pediatrics 1993; 91:(2)470-3. 
134.  Ju SH and Lin CH. The effect of moderate non -hemolytic jaundice and phototherapy on newborn behavior. Chung-H ua Min Kuo 
Hsiao Erh Ko i Hsueh Hui Tsa Chih 1991; 32:(1)31-41. 
135.  Al-Alaiyan S. Fiberoptic, conventional and combination phototherapy for treatment of nonhemolytic hyperbilirubinemia in 
neonates. Annals of Saudi Medicine 1996; 16:(6)633-6. 
136.  Nuntnarumit P and Naka C. Comparison of the effectiveness between the adapted -double phototherapy versus conventional -
single phototherapy. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 2002; 85:(SUPPL. 4)S1159-S1166. 
137.  Boonyarittipong P, Kriangburapa W, and Booranavanich K. Effectiveness of double -surface intensive phototherapy versus single-
surface intensive phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 2008; 91:(1)50-5. 
138.  Tan KL. Efficacy of bidirectional fiber-optic phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics 1997; 99:(5)E13. 
139.  Sarici SU, Alpay F, Dundaroz MR et al. Fiberoptic phototherapy versus conventional daylight phototherapy for hyperbilirubinemia 
of term newborns. Turkish Journal of Pediatrics 2001; 43:(4)280-5. 
140.  Gale R, Dranitzki Z, Dollber g S et al. A randomized, controlled application of the Wallaby phototherapy system compared with 
standard phototherapy. Journal of Perinatology 1990; 10:(3)239-42. 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
515 
141.  Holtrop PC, Madison K, and Maisels MJ. A clinical trial of fiberoptic phototherapy vs conventional phototherapy. American 
Journal of Diseases of Children 1992; 146:(2)235-7. 
142.  Pezzati M, Fusi F, Dani C  et al. Changes in skin temperature of hyperbilirubinemic newborns under phototherapy: conventional 
versus fiberoptic device. American Journal of Perinatology 2002; 19:(8)439-44. 
143.  Seidman DS, Moise J, Ergaz Z  et al. A new blue light -emitting phototherapy device: a prospective randomized controlled study. 
Journal of Pediatrics 2000; 136:(6)771-4. 
144.  Seidman DS, Moise J, Ergaz Z  et al. A prospective randomized controlled study of phototherapy using blue and blue -green light-
emitting devices, and conventional halogen-quartz phototherapy. Journal of Perinatology 2003; 23:(2)123-7. 
145.  Morris BH, Oh W, Tyson JE  et al. Aggressive vs. con servative phototherapy for infants with extremely low birth weight. New 
England Journal of Medicine 2008; 359:(18)1885-96. 
146.  Valdes OS, Maurer HM, Shumway CN  et al.  Controlled clinical trial of phenobarbital and -or light in reducing neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia in a predominantly Negro population. Journal of Pediatrics 1971; 79:(6)1015-7. 
147.  Maurer HM, Shumway CN, Draper DA  et al.  Controlled trial comparing agar, intermittent phototherapy, and continuous 
phototherapy for reducing neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Pediatrics 1973; 82:(1)73-6. 
148.  Wu PY, Lim RC, Hodgman JE  et al.  Effect of phototherapy in preterm infants on growth in the neonatal period. Journal of 
Pediatrics 1974; 85:(4)563-6. 
149.  Curtis-Cohen M, Stahl GE, Costarino AT et al. Randomized trial of prophylactic phototherapy in the infant with very low birth 
weight. Journal of Pediatrics 1985; 107:(1)121-4. 
150.  Leite MD and Facchini FP. [Evaluation of two guidelines for the management of hyperbilirubinemia in newborn babies weigh ing 
less than 2,000 g].[see comment]. [Portuguese]. Jornal de Pediatria 2004; 80:(4)285-90. 
151.  Holtrop PC, Ruedisueli K, and Maisels MJ. Double versus single phototherapy in low birth weight newborns. Pediatrics  1992; 
90:(5)674-7. 
152.  Romagnoli C, Zecca E, Papacci P et al. Which phototherapy system is most effective in lowering serum bilirubin in very preterm 
infants? Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy 2006; 21:(2)204-9. 
153.  Dani C, Bertini G, Martelli E  et al. Effects of phototherapy on cerebral haemodynam ics in preterm infants: is fibre -optic different 
from conventional phototherapy? Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 2004; 46:(2)114-8. 
154.  van Kaam AH, van Beek RH, Vergunst-van Keulen JG et al. Fibre optic versus conventional phototherapy for hyperbilirubinaemia 
in preterm infants. European Journal of Pediatrics 1998; 157:(2)132-7. 
155.  Dani C, Martelli E, Reali MF  et al. Fiberoptic and conventional phototherapy effects on the skin of premature infants. Journal of 
Pediatrics 2001; 138:(3)438-40. 
156.  Costello SA, Nyikal J, Yu VY  et al. BiliBlanket phototherapy system versus conventional phototherapy: a randomized controlled 
trial in preterm infants. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 1995; 31:(1)11-3. 
157.  Pezzati M, Biagiotti R, Vangi V  e t al.  Changes in mesenteric blood flow response to feeding: Conventional versus fiber- optic 
phototherapy. Pediatrics 2000; 105:(2)350-3. 
158.  Martins BM, de CM, Moreira ME et al. Efficacy of new microprocessed phototherapy system with five high intensity light emitting 
diodes (Super LED). Jornal de Pediatria 2007; 83:(3)253-8. 
159.  Bertini G, Perugi S, Elia S  et al. Transepidermal water loss and cerebral hemodynamics in preterm infants: conventional versus 
LED phototherapy. European Journal of Pediatrics 2008; 167:(1)37-42. 
160.  Ebbesen F, Madsen P, Stovring S et al. Therapeutic effect of turquoise versus blue light with equal irradiance in preterm infants 
with jaundice. Acta Paediatrica 2007; 96:(6)837-41. 
161.  Ebbesen F, Agati G, and Pratesi R. Phototherapy with turquoise versus blue light. Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and 
Neonatal Edition 2003; 88:(5)F430-F431. 
162.  Ayyash H, Hadjigeorgiou E, Sofatzis I  et al. Green or blue light phototherapy for neonates with hyperbilirubinaemia. Archives o f 
Disease in Childhood 1987; 62:(8)843-5. 
163.  Amato M and Inaebnit D. Clinical usefulness of high intensity green light phototherapy in the treatment of neonatal jaundice.  
European Journal of Pediatrics 1991; 150:(4)274-6. 
164.  Vecchi C, Donzelli GP, Sb rana G  et al.  Phototherapy for neonatal jaundice: clinical equivalence of fluorescent green and 
"special" blue lamps. Journal of Pediatrics 1986; 108:(3)452-6. 
165.  Sisson TR, Kendall N, Shaw E et al. Phototherapy of jaundice in the newborn infant. II. Effect of various light intensities. Journal of 
Pediatrics 1972; 81:(1)35-8. 
166.  Shinwell ES, Sciaky Y, and Karplus M. Effect of position changing on bilirubin levels during phototherapy. Journal of Perinatology  
2002; 22:(3)226-9. 
167.  Chen CM, Liu SH, La i CC et al. Changing position does not improve the efficacy of conventional phototherapy. Acta Paediatrica 
Taiwanica 2002; 43:(5)255-8. 
168.  Mohammadzadeh A, Bostani Z, Jafarnejad F et al. Supine versus turning position on bilirubin level during phototherapy in healthy 
term jaundiced neonates. Saudi Medical Journal 2004; 25:(12)2051-2. 
169.
  Fok TF, Wong W, and Cheng AF. Use of eyepatches in phototherapy: effects on conjunctival bacterial pathogens and 
conjunctivitis. Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal 1995; 14:(12)1091-4. 
170.  Fok TF, Wong W, and Cheung KL. Eye protection for newborns under phototherapy: comparison between a modified headbox 
and the conventional eyepatches. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics 1997; 17:(4)349-54. 
171.  Paludetto R, Mansi G, R inaldi P et al. Effects of different ways of covering the eyes on behavior of jaundiced infants treated with 
phototherapy. Biology of the Neonate 1985; 47:(1)1-8. 
172.  Lau SP and Fung KP. Serum bilirubin kinetics in intermittent phototherapy of physiologi cal jaundice. Archives of Disease in 
Childhood 1984; 59:(9)892-4. 
173.  Vogl TP, Hegyi T, Hiatt IM et al.  Intermediate phototherapy in the treatment of jaundice in the premature infant. Journal of 
Pediatrics 1978; 92:(4)627-30. 
174.  Mehta S, Kumar P, and Narang A. A randomized controlled trial of fluid supplementation in term neonates with severe 
hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Pediatrics 2005; 147:(6)781-5. 
175.  Boo NYL. Randomized controlled trial of oral versus intravenous fluid supplementation on serum  bilirubin level during 
phototherapy of term infants with severe hyperbilirubinaemia. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 2002; 38:(2)151-5. 

Neonatal jaundice 
516 
176.  Tontisirin K, Tejavej A, Siripoonya P et al. Effect of phototherapy on nutrients utilization in newborn infants with jaundice. Journal 
of the Medical Association of Thailand 1989; 72 Suppl 1:177-82. 
177.  Speck WT and Rosenkranz HS. Phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia-- a potential environmental health hazard to 
newborn infants: a review. Environmental Mutagenesis 1979; 1:(4)321-36. 
178.  Tatli MM, Minnet C, Kocyigit A  et al.  Phototherapy increases DNA damage in lymphocytes of hyperbilirubinemic neonates. 
Mutation Research - Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis 2008; 654:(1)93-Genetic. 
179.  Aycicek A, Kocyigit A, Erel O  et al. Phototherapy causes DNA damage in peripheral mononuclear leukocytes in term infants. 
Jornal de Pediatria 2008; 84:(2)141-6. 
180.  Berg P and Lindelof B. Is phototherapy in neonates a risk factor for malignant melanoma  development? Archives of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine 1997; 151:(12)1185-7. 
181.  Mahe E, Beauchet A, Aegerter P et al. Neonatal Blue-Light Phototherapy Does Not Increase Nevus Count in 9-Year-Old Children. 
Pediatrics 2009; 123:(5)e896-e900. 
182.  M atichard E, Le HA, Sanders A  et al.  Effect of neonatal phototherapy on melanocytic nevus count in children. Archives of 
Dermatology 2006; 142:(12)1599-604. 
183.  Turan O, Ergenekon E, Koc E  et al. Impact of phototherapy on vasoactive mediators: NO and VEGF  in the newborn. Journal of 
Perinatal Medicine 2004; 32:(4)359-64. 
184.  Rosenfeld W, Sadhev S, Brunot V  et al. Phototherapy effect on the incidence of patent ductus arteriosus in premature infants: 
prevention with chest shielding. Pediatrics 1986; 78:(1)10-4. 
185.  Wananukul S and Praisuwanna P. Transepidermal water loss during conventional phototherapy in nonhemolytic 
hyperbilirubinemia term infants. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 2001; 84 Suppl 1:S46-S50. 
186.  Maayan-Metzger A, Yosipovit ch G, Hadad E  et al.  Transepidermal water loss and skin hydration in preterm infants during 
phototherapy. American Journal of Perinatology 2001; 18:(7)393-6. 
187.  Grunhagen DJ, De B, De B  et al. Transepidermal water loss during halogen spotlight photother apy in preterm infants. Pediatric 
Research 2002; 51:(3)402-5. 
188.  Wananukul S and Praisuwanna P. Clear topical ointment decreases transepidermal water loss in jaundiced preterm infants 
receiving phototherapy. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 2002; 85:(1)102-6. 
189.  Weissman A, Berkowitz E, Smolkin T et al. Effect of phototherapy on neonatal heart rate variability and complexity. Neonatology  
2009; 95:(1)41-6. 
190.  Djokomuljanto S, Quah BS, Surini Y et al. Efficacy of phototherapy for neonatal jaundice is increased by the use of low-cost white 
reflecting curtains. Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2006; 91:(6)F439-F442. 
191.  Eggert P, Stick C, and Swalve S. On the efficacy of various irradiation regimens in photothe rapy of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. 
European Journal of Pediatrics 1988; 147:(5)525-8. 
192.  Sivanandan S, Chawla D, Misra S  et al.  Effect of sling application on efficacy of phototherapy in healthy term neonates with 
nonhemolytic jaundice: a randomized conrolled trial. Indian Pediatrics 2009; 46:(1)23-8. 
193.  Wishingrad L, Cornblath M, Takakuwa T  et al.  STUDIES OF NON -HEMOLYTIC HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA IN PREMATURE 
INFANTS: I. Prospective Randomized Selection for Exchange Transfusion with Observations on the Levels of Serum Bilirubin with 
and without Exchange Transfusion and Neurologic Evaluations One Year after Birth. Pediatrics 1965; 36:(2)162-72. 
194.  Mollison PL and Walker W. Controlled trials of the treatment of haemolytic disease of the newborn. Lancet 1952; 1:(6705)429-33. 
195.  Armitage P and Mollison PL. Further analysis of controlled trials of treatment of haemolytic disease of the newborn. Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology of the British Empire 1953; 60:(5)605-20. 
196.  Amato M, Blumberg A, Herm ann U, Jr.  et al.  Effectiveness of single versus double volume exchange transfusion in newborn 
infants with AB0 hemolytic disease. Helvetica Paediatrica Acta 1988; 43:(3)177-86. 
197.  Tan KL. Comparison of the effectiveness of phototherapy and exchange transfusion in the management of nonhemolytic neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Pediatrics 1975; 87:(4)609-12. 
198.  Chan G and Schiff D. Variance in albumin loading in exchange transfusions. Journal of Pediatrics 1976; 88:(4 Pt. 1)609-13. 
199.  Grajwer LA, Pildes RS, Zarif M  et al. Exchange transfusion in the neonate: a controlled study using frozen- stored erythrocytes 
resuspended in plasma. American Journal of Clinical Pathology 1976; 66:(1)117-21. 
200.  Cockington RA. A guide to the use of phototherapy in the management of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of Pediatrics  
1979; 95:(2)281-5. 
201.  Locham KK, Kaur K, Tandon R et al. Exchange blood transfusion in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia-role of calcium. Indian Pediatrics 
2002; 39:(7)657-9. 
202.  Ahmed SM, Charoo BA, Iqbal Q et al. Exchange transfusion through peripheral route. Jk Practitioner 2005; 12:(3)118-20. 
203.  Patra K, Storfer -Isser A, Siner B  et al.  Adverse events associated with neonatal exchange transfusion in the 1990s. Journal of 
Pediatrics 2004; 144:(5)626-31. 
204.  Jackson JC. Adverse events associated with exchange transfusion in healthy and ill newborns. Pediatrics 1997; 99:(5)E7. 
205.  Voto LS, Sexer H, Ferreiro G et al. N eonatal administration of high -dose intravenous immunoglobulin in rhesus hemolytic disease. 
Journal of Perinatal Medicine 1995; 23:(6)443-51. 
206.  Miqdad AM, Abdelbasit OB, Shaheed MM et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin G (IVIG) therapy for significant hyperbilirubinemia 
in ABO hemolytic disease of the newborn. Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine 2004; 16:(3)163-Fetal. 
207.  Rubo J, Albrecht K, Lasch P et al. High-dose intravenous immune globulin therapy for hyperbilirubinemia caused by Rh hemolytic 
disease. Journal of Pediatrics 1992; 121:(1)93-7. 
208.  Dagoglu T, Ovali F, Samanci N  et al. High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin therapy for rhesus haemolytic disease. Journal of 
International Medical Research 1995; 23:(4)264-71. 
209.  Nasseri F, Mamouri GA, and Babaei H. Intravenous immunoglobulin in ABO and Rh hemolytic diseases of newborn. Saudi 
Medical Journal 2006; 27:(12)1827-30. 
210.  Polacek K. Die fruhzeitige Indikationstellung zur Austausch -transfusion bei hamolytischen Neugeborenerkrankungen. Monatsschr 
Kinderheilkd 1963; 111:6-10. 
211.  Polacek K. Das universale Diagramm zur Behandlung der Hyperbilirubinamie der Neugerborenen. Padiatrische Praxis 1984; 29:1-
3. 

Abbreviations, glossary and references 
517 
212.  Moslehi MA and Pishva N. Determination of effect of low dose vs moderate dose clofribate on decreasing serum bilirubin in 
healthy term neonates. Iranian Journal of Pediatrics 2007; 17:(2)108-12. 
213.  Mohammadzadeh A, Farhat AS, and Iranpour R. Effect of clofibrate in jaundiced term newborns. Indian Journal of Pediatrics  
2005; 72:(2)123-6. 
214.  Eghbalian F, Pourhossein A, and Zandevakili H. Effect of clofibrate in non -hemolytic indirect hyperbiliru -binemia in full term 
neonates. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 2007; 74:(11)1003-6. 
215.  Zahedpasha Y, hmadpour-Kacho M, Hajiahmadi M  et al. Effect of clofibrate in jaundiced full -term infants:a randomized clinical 
trial. Archives of Iranian Medicine 2007; 10:(3)349-53. 
216.  Zahedpasha Y, hmadpour -Kacho M, Hajiahmadi M  et al.  Efficacy of clofibrate on severe neonatal jaundice associated with 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (a randomized clinical trial). Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and 
Public Health 2008; 39:(3)557-61. 
217.  Pascale JA, Mims LC, Greenberg MH  et al. Riboflaven and bilirubin response during phototherapy. Pediatric Research 1976; 
10:(10)854-6. 
218.  Pataki L,  Matkovics B, Novak Z  et al.  Riboflavin (vitamin B2) treatment of neonatal pathological jaundice. Acta Paediatrica 
Hungarica 1985; 26:(4)341-5. 
219.  Yurdakok M, Erdem G, and Tekinalp G. Riboflavin in the treatment of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Turkish J ournal of Pediatrics 
1988; 30:(3)159-61. 
220.  Nicolopoulos D, Hadjigeorgiou E, Malamitsi A  et al.  Combined treatment of neonatal jaundice with cholestyramine and 
phototherapy. Journal of Pediatrics 1978; 93:(4)684-8. 
221.  Tan KL, Jacob E, Liew DS et al. Cholestyramine and phototherapy for neonatal jaundice. Journal of Pediatrics 1984; 104:(2)284-6. 
222.  Odell GB, Gutcher GR, Whitington F  et al. Enteral administration of agar as an effective adjunct to phototherapy of neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatric Research 1983; 17:(10)810-4. 
223.  Ebbesen F and Moller J. Agar ingestion combined with phototherapy in jaundiced newborn infants. Biology of the Neonate  1977; 
31:(1-2)7-9. 
224.  Martin JR. Phototherapy, phenobarbitone and physiological jaundice in the newborn infant. New Zealand Medical Journal  1974; 
79:(517)1022-4. 
225.  Farhat AS, Mohammadzadeh A, Amir M  et al. Effect of cotoneaster tricolor pojark manna on serum bilirubin levels in neonates. 
International Journal of Pharmacology 2006; 2:(4)455-8. 
226.  Yeung CY, Leung CS, and Chen YZ. An old traditional herbal remedy for neonatal jaundice with a newly identified risk. Journal of 
Paediatrics and Child Health 1993; 29:(4)292-4. 
227.   WHO cooperative trial on primary prevention of ischaemic heart disease  with clofibrate to lower serum cholesterol: final 
mortality follow-up. Report of the Committee of Principal Investigators. Lancet 1984; 2:(8403)600-4. 
228.  Salem-Schatz S, Peterson LE, Palmer RH  et al. Barriers to first -week follow-up of newborns: findings from parent and clinician 
focus groups. Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Safety 2004; 30:(11)593-601. 
229.  Willis SK, Hannon PR, and Scrimshaw SC. The impact of the maternal experience with a jaundiced newborn on the breastfeeding 
relationship. Journal of Family Practice 2002; 51:(5)465. 
230.  Hannon PR, Willis SK, and Scrimshaw SC. Persistence of maternal concerns surrounding neonatal jaundice: an exploratory study. 
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 2001; 155:(12)1357-63. 
231.  Davidson L and Thilo EH. How to make kernicterus a never event. NeoReviews 2000; 4:e308-e316. 
232.  Browk AK and Johnson L. Loss of concern about jaundice and the reemergence of kernicterus in full time infants in the era of 
managed care. Yearbook of Neonatal and Perinatal Medicine. Mosby; 1996. p. xvii-xxviii. 
233.  Ebbesen F. Recurrence of kernicterus in term and near -term infants in Denmark. Acta Paediatrica, International Journal of 
Paediatrics 2000; 89:(10)1213-7. 
234.  Suresh GK and Clark RE. Cost -effectiveness of strategies that are intended to prevent kernicterus in newborn infants. Pediatrics  
2004; 114:(4)917-24. 
235.  Bhutani VK and Johnson L. Kernicterus in the 21st century: frequently asked questions. J Perinatol 0 AD; 29:(S1)S20-S24. 
236.  Newman TB. The power of stories over statistics. British Medical Journal 2003; 327:(7429)1424-7. 
237.  National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. The guidelines manual. London: National Institute for Health and Clini cal 
Excellence; 2009. 
238.  Office for National Statistics. Births in England and Wales, selected background data. 2008 [cited 2010 Jan 3]; Available from: 
URL:http://www.statistics.gov.uk/statbase/Product.asp?vlnk=14408 
239.  Personal Social Services Research Unit. Unit Costs of Health and Social Care. Canterbury: University of Kent; 2008. 
240.  Johnson L, Bhutani VK, Karp K  et al.  Clinical report from the pilot USA Kernicterus Registry (1992 to 2004). Journal of 
Perinatology 2009; 29:(S1)S25-S45. 
241.  Anderson D, Ali K, Blanchette V  et al.  Guidelines on the use of intravenous immune globulin for hematologic conditions. 
Transfusion Medicine Reviews 2007; 21:(2 Suppl 1)S9-56. 
242.  Department of Health. NHS reference costs 2007-08. London: Department of Health; 2009. 
243.  Ip S, Chung M, Kulig J et al. An Evidence-Based Review of Important Issues Concerning Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics 
2004; 114:(1)e130-e153. 
 
 