URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/hcp/clinical-care/index.html
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

Treatment of Pertussis | Whooping Cough | CDC

Skip directly to site content

Skip directly to search

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Treatment of Pertussis

For Health Care Providers

Dec. 2, 2025

Key points

Treatment within the first 1-2 weeks is most effective for reducing symptom severity.

Healthcare providers should consider treating prior to test results if certain circumstances are present.

Choosing the type of antibiotic to use may depend on a number of factors, including age and antibiotic resistance patterns.

Find more information below about who to treat, when to treat, and antibiotic selection.

Early treatment can reduce severity

The earlier someone, especially an infant, starts treatment the better. If someone starts treatment during the first 1 to 2 weeks before coughing paroxysms occur, symptoms may be lessened.

Antibiotics won't alter the course of the illness or prevent transmission if given later in the illness.

Consider treating prior to test results

Healthcare providers should strongly consider treating prior to test results if any of the following are present:

Clinical history is strongly suggestive of pertussis

Person is at high risk for severe or complicated disease

Person has or will have contact with someone at high risk for severe disease

Infants are a high-risk group, as are pregnant women in their third trimester since they'll have contact with their newborn.

Treatment timeline

A reasonable guideline is to treat

People 1 year of age and older within 3 weeks of cough onset

Infants younger than 1 year of age within 6 weeks of cough onset
A

Pregnant women (especially if near term) within 6 weeks of cough onset
A

Postexposure Prophylaxis (PEP)

To prevent pertussis, CDC supports PEP with antibiotics for those at high risk of developing severe pertussis and their close contacts.
Use PEP to prevent severe pertussis

Antibiotic choice

The recommended antibiotics for treatment or postexposure prophylaxis of pertussis are

Macrolides (i.e., azithromycin
B
, clarithromycin, and erythromycin)

Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

Important considerations

Healthcare providers should choose an antibiotic after consideration that includes the

Potential for adverse events and drug interactions

Tolerability

Ease of adherence to the regimen prescribed

Recent travel (≤21 days) to a region where
macrolide resistance is common

Cost

Treatment options vary by age

Infants less than 1 month of age

Use
macrolides
with caution. An association between orally administered erythromycin or azithromycin and infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (IHPS) has been reported.

However, azithromycin
B
remains the drug of choice for treatment or prophylaxis of pertussis in very young infants. The risk of developing severe pertussis and life-threatening complications outweighs the potential risk of IHPS.

Monitor infants <1 month of age who receive a macrolide for the development of IHPS and for other serious adverse events.

People 1 month of age and older

Macrolides (erythromycin, clarithromycin, and azithromycin) are preferred for the treatment of pertussis.

People 2 months of age and older

An alternative to macrolides is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, particularly when macrolide resistance is suspected or confirmed.

Resource

Recommended antimicrobial agents for the treatment and postexposure prophylaxis of pertussis: 2005 CDC guidelines

On This Page

Early treatment can reduce severity

Antibiotic choice

Treatment options vary by age

Resource

Dec. 2, 2025

Sources and Page Info

Print

Share

Facebook

LinkedIn

Twitter

Syndicate

Content Source

National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases
;
Division of Bacterial Diseases

About This Page

Published:
May 15, 2024

Updated:
December 2, 2025
This page was last updated on this date. Updates may include minor edits, image changes, or other modifications to page content.

Reviewed:
December 2, 2025
The information on this page was last reviewed by subject matter experts to ensure accuracy.

Footnotes
While antibiotics are most effective during the first weeks of illness, given the severity of pertussis in infants and out of an abundance of caution, CDC recommends antibiotics up to 6 weeks following cough onset.

On March 12, 2013, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a
warning
that azithromycin can cause abnormal changes in the electrical activity of the heart that may lead to a potentially fatal irregular heart rhythm in some patients. Azithromycin remains one of the recommended drugs for treatment and chemoprophylaxis of pertussis but consider using an alternative drug in those who have known cardiovascular disease, including: Patients with known prolongation of the QT interval, a history of torsades de pointes, congenital long QT syndrome, bradyarrhythmias, or uncompensated heart failure; patients on drugs known to prolong the QT interval; patients with ongoing proarrhythmic conditions such as uncorrected hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia, clinically significant bradycardia, and patients receiving Class IA (quinidine, procainamide) or Class III (dofetilide, amiodarone, sotalol) antiarrhythmic agents; elderly patients and patients with cardiac disease may be more susceptible to the effects of arrhythmogenic drugs on the QT interval.

Sources
Azithromycin in Early Infancy and Pyloric Stenosis | Pediatrics | American Academy of Pediatrics

Whooping Cough

Pertussis, also known as whooping cough, can cause serious illness in people of all ages but is most dangerous for babies.

View All

For Everyone

About

Symptoms

Vaccination

Treatment

Health Care Providers

Clinical Overview

Clinical Features

Vaccine Recommendations

View All

Public Health

Guidance for Health Departments

Postexposure Antimicrobial Prophylaxis

Lab Testing

View All

Sign up for Email Updates