URL: https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=bfa8018a-4cbc-434b-e09e-782872b0340a
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: Public domain (US Government work, FDA-approved labeling)

openFDA label | set_id bfa8018a-4cbc-434b-e09e-782872b0340a | version 35 | effective 20260824 | Fentanyl Citrate | Hospira, Inc.

## boxed_warning
WARNING: SERIOUS AND LIFE-THREATENING RISKS FROM USE OF FENTANYL ‎CITRATE INJECTION WARNING: SERIOUS AND LIFE-THREATENING RISKS FROM USE OF FENTANYL ‎CITRATE INJECTION See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning. • Fentanyl Citrate Injection exposes users to risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse, which can lead to overdose and death. Assess patient's risk before prescribing and reassess regularly for these behaviors and conditions. ( 5.1 ) • Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression may occur with use Fentanyl Citrate Injection, especially during initiation or following a dosage increase. To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of ‎Fentanyl Citrate Injection are essential.‎ ( 5.2 ) • Concomitant use of opioids with benzodiazepines or other central nervous system (CNS) depressants, including alcohol, may result in profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death. Reserve concomitant prescribing for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are inadequate. ( 5.3 , 7 ) • Concomitant use with CYP3A4 inhibitors (or discontinuation of CYP3A4 inducers) can result in a fatal overdose of fentanyl. ( 5.4 , 7 , 12.3 ) Addiction, Abuse, and Misuse Because the use of Fentanyl Citrate Injection exposes patients and other users to the risks of opioid addiction, abuse, and misuse, which can lead to overdose and death. Assess each patient’s risk prior to prescribing and reassess all patients regularly for the development of these behaviors and conditions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ] . Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression may occur with use of Fentanyl Citrate Injection especially during initiation or following a dosage increase‎. To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of Fentanyl Citrate Injection are essential [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] . Risks From Concomitant Use With Benzodiazepines Or Other CNS Depressants Concomitant use of opioids with benzodiazepines or other central nervous system (CNS) depressants, including alcohol, may result in profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death. Reserve concomitant prescribing of Fentanyl Citrate Injection and benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are inadequate [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) , Drug Interactions (7) ] . Cytochrome P450 3A4 Interaction The concomitant use of Fentanyl Citrate Injection with all cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors may result in an increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations, which could increase or prolong adverse reactions and may cause potentially fatal respiratory depression. In addition, discontinuation of a concomitantly used cytochrome P450 3A4 inducer may result in an increase in fentanyl plasma concentration. Monitor patients receiving Fentanyl Citrate Injection and any CYP3A4 inhibitor or inducer [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) , Drug Interactions (7) , Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) ] .

## indications_and_usage
1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE Fentanyl Citrate Injection is indicated for: • analgesic action of short duration during the anesthetic periods, premedication, induction and maintenance, and in the immediate postoperative period (recovery room) as the need arises. • use as an opioid analgesic supplement in general or regional anesthesia. • administration with a neuroleptic as an anesthetic premedication, for the induction of anesthesia and as an adjunct in the maintenance of general and regional anesthesia. • use as an anesthetic agent with oxygen in selected high-risk patients, such as those undergoing open heart surgery or certain complicated neurological or orthopedic procedures. Fentanyl Citrate Injection is an opioid agonist indicated for ( 1 ): • analgesic action of short duration during the anesthetic periods, premedication, induction and maintenance, and in the immediate postoperative period (recovery room) as the need arises. • use as an opioid analgesic supplement in general or regional anesthesia. • administration with a neuroleptic as an anesthetic premedication, for the induction of anesthesia and as an adjunct in the maintenance of general and regional anesthesia. • use as an anesthetic agent with oxygen in selected high risk patients, such as those undergoing open heart surgery or certain complicated neurological or orthopedic procedures.

## dosage_and_administration
2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION • Fentanyl Citrate Injection should be administered only by persons specifically trained in the use of intravenous anesthetics and management of the respiratory effects of potent opioids. ( 2.1 ) • Ensure that an opioid overdose reversal agent, resuscitative and intubation equipment, and oxygen are readily available. ( 2.1 ) • Individualize dosing based on the factors such as age, body weight, physical status, underlying pathological condition, use of other drugs, type of anesthesia to be used, and the surgical procedure involved. ( 2.1 ) • Initiate treatment in adults with 50 to 100 mcg (0.05 to 0.1 mg) (1 to 2 mL). ( 2.2 ) • Initiate treatment in children 2 to 12 years of age with a reduced dose as low as 2 to 3 mcg/kg. ( 2.2 ) 2.1 Important Dosage and Administration Instructions Fentanyl Citrate Injection should be administered only by persons specifically trained in the use of intravenous anesthetics and management of the respiratory effects of potent opioids. • Ensure that an opioid overdose reversal agent (e.g., naloxone, nalmefene) , resuscitative and intubation equipment, and oxygen are readily available. • Individualize dosage based on factors such as age, body weight, physical status, underlying pathological condition, use of other drugs, type of anesthesia to be used, and the surgical procedure involved. • Monitor vital signs routinely. As with other potent opioids, the respiratory depressant effect of fentanyl may persist longer than the measured analgesic effect. The total dose of all opioid agonists administered should be considered by the practitioner before ordering opioid analgesics during recovery from anesthesia. If Fentanyl Citrate Injection is administered with a CNS depressant, become familiar with the properties of each drug, particularly each product's duration of action. In addition, when such a combination is used, fluids and other countermeasures to manage hypotension should be available [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) ] . Inspect parenteral drug products visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration, whenever solution and container permit. 2.2 Dosage 50 mcg = 0.05 mg = 1 mL Premedication in Adults 50 to 100 mcg (0.05 to 0.1 mg) (1 to 2 mL) may be administered intramuscularly 30 to 60 minutes prior to surgery. Adjunct to General Anesthesia See Dosage Range Charts below. Table 1: Dosage Range Chart TOTAL DOSAGE (expressed as fentanyl base) Low Dose – Moderate Dose – High Dose – 2 mcg/kg (0.002 mg/kg) (0.04 mL/kg). For use in minor, but painful, surgical procedures. May also provide some pain relief in the immediate postoperative period. 2–20 mcg/kg (0.002–0.02 mg/kg) (0.04–0.4 mL/kg). For use in major surgical procedures, in addition to adequate analgesia, may abolish some of the stress response. Expect respiratory depression requiring artificial ventilation during anesthesia and careful observation of ventilation postoperatively is essential. 20–50 mcg/kg (0.02–0.05 mg/kg) (0.4–1 mL/kg). For open heart surgery and certain more complicated neurosurgical and orthopedic procedures where surgery is more prolonged, and the stress response to surgery would be detrimental to the wellbeing of the patient. In conjunction with nitrous oxide/oxygen has been shown to attenuate the stress response as defined by increased levels of circulating growth hormone, catecholamine, ADH and prolactin. Expect the need for postoperative ventilation and observation are essential due to extended postoperative respiratory depression. MAINTENANCE DOSE (expressed as fentanyl base) Low Dose – Moderate Dose – High Dose – 2 mcg/kg (0.002 mg/kg) (0.04 mL/kg). Additional dosages are infrequently needed in these minor procedures. 2–20 mcg/kg (0.002–0.02 mg/kg) (0.04–0.4 mL/kg). 25 to 100 mcg (0.025 to 0.1 mg) (0.5 to 2 mL) Administer intravenously or intramuscularly as needed when movement and/or changes in vital signs indicate surgical stress or lightening of analgesia. 20–50 mcg/kg (0.02–0.05 mg/kg) (0.4–1 mL/kg). Maintenance dosage [ranging from 25 mcg (0.025 mg) (0.5 mL) to one half the initial loading dose] as needed based on vital signs changes indicative of stress and lightening of analgesia. Individualize dosage especially if the anticipated remaining operative time is short. Adjunct to Regional Anesthesia 50 to 100 mcg (0.05 to 0.1 mg) (1 to 2 mL) may be administered intramuscularly or slowly intravenously, over one to two minutes, when additional analgesia is required. Postoperatively (recovery room) 50 to 100 mcg (0.05 to 0.1 mg) (1 to 2 mL) may be administered intramuscularly for the control of pain, tachypnea and emergence delirium. The dose may be repeated in one to two hours as needed. For Induction and Maintenance in Children 2 to 12 Years of Age A reduced dose as low as 2 to 3 mcg/kg is recommended. As a General Anesthetic As a technique to attenuate the responses to surgical stress without the use of additional anesthetic agents, doses of 50 to 100 mcg/kg (0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg) (1 to 2 mL/kg) may be administered with oxygen and a muscle relaxant. In certain cases, doses up to 150 mcg/kg (0.15 mg/kg) (3 mL/kg) may be necessary to produce this anesthetic effect. It has been used for open heart surgery and certain other major surgical procedures in patients for whom protection of the myocardium from excess oxygen demand is particularly indicated, and for certain complicated neurological and orthopedic procedures.

## dosage_and_administration_table
Table 1: Dosage Range Chart

TOTAL DOSAGE (expressed as fentanyl base)

Low Dose – | Moderate Dose – | High Dose –

2 mcg/kg (0.002 mg/kg) (0.04 mL/kg). For use in minor, but painful, surgical procedures. May also provide some pain relief in the immediate postoperative period. | 2–20 mcg/kg (0.002–0.02 mg/kg) (0.04–0.4 mL/kg). For use in major surgical procedures, in addition to adequate analgesia, may abolish some of the stress response. Expect respiratory depression requiring artificial ventilation during anesthesia and careful observation of ventilation postoperatively is essential. | 20–50 mcg/kg (0.02–0.05 mg/kg) (0.4–1 mL/kg). For open heart surgery and certain more complicated neurosurgical and orthopedic procedures where surgery is more prolonged, and the stress response to surgery would be detrimental to the wellbeing of the patient. In conjunction with nitrous oxide/oxygen has been shown to attenuate the stress response as defined by increased levels of circulating growth hormone, catecholamine, ADH and prolactin. Expect the need for postoperative ventilation and observation are essential due to extended postoperative respiratory depression.

| |

MAINTENANCE DOSE (expressed as fentanyl base)

Low Dose – | Moderate Dose – | High Dose –

2 mcg/kg (0.002 mg/kg) (0.04 mL/kg). Additional dosages are infrequently needed in these minor procedures. | 2–20 mcg/kg (0.002–0.02 mg/kg) (0.04–0.4 mL/kg). 25 to 100 mcg (0.025 to 0.1 mg) (0.5 to 2 mL) Administer intravenously or intramuscularly as needed when movement and/or changes in vital signs indicate surgical stress or lightening of analgesia. | 20–50 mcg/kg (0.02–0.05 mg/kg) (0.4–1 mL/kg). Maintenance dosage [ranging from 25 mcg (0.025 mg) (0.5 mL) to one half the initial loading dose] as needed based on vital signs changes indicative of stress and lightening of analgesia. Individualize dosage especially if the anticipated remaining operative time is short.

## dosage_forms_and_strengths
3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS • Injection: 50 mcg (0.05 mg)/mL in single-dose Fliptop vial. • Injection: 50 mcg (0.05 mg)/mL in single-dose ampule. • Injection: 50 mcg (0.05 mg)/mL in single-dose Fliptop vial. ( 3 ) • Injection: 50 mcg (0.05 mg)/mL in single-dose ampule. ( 3 )

## how_supplied
16 HOW SUPPLIED/STORAGE AND HANDLING Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP equivalent to 50 mcg (0.05 mg) fentanyl per mL, is supplied in single-dose ampules and single-dose vials for intramuscular and intravenous administration, and available as follows: Unit of Sale Concentration NDC 0409-9094-22 Tray containing 25, 2 mL Single-dose Fliptop Vials 100 mcg Fentanyl/2 mL (50 mcg/mL) NDC 0409-9094-25 Tray containing 25, 5 mL Single-dose Fliptop Vials 250 mcg Fentanyl/5 mL (50 mcg/mL) NDC 0409-9093-36 Carton containing 5, 10 mL Single-dose Ampules 500 mcg Fentanyl/10 mL (50 mcg/mL) NDC 0409-9094-28 Tray containing 25, 10 mL Single-dose Fliptop Vials 500 mcg Fentanyl/10 mL (50 mcg/mL) NDC 0409-9093-38 Carton containing 5, 20 mL Single-dose Ampules 1000 mcg Fentanyl/20 mL (50 mcg/mL) NDC 0409-9094-31 Tray containing 25, 20 mL Single-dose Fliptop Vials 1000 mcg Fentanyl/20 mL (50 mcg/mL) NDC 0409-9094-61 Tray containing 25, 50 mL Single-dose Fliptop Vials 2500 mcg Fentanyl/50 mL (50 mcg/mL) NDC 0409-9094-55 Carton containing 1, 50 mL Single-dose Fliptop Vial 2500 mcg Fentanyl/50 mL (50 mcg/mL) Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. Store at 20°C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F). [see USP Controlled Room Temperature.]

## storage_and_handling
Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. Store at 20°C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F). [see USP Controlled Room Temperature.]

## pediatric_use
8.4 Pediatric Use The safety and efficacy of Fentanyl Citrate Injection in children under two years of age has not been established. Rare cases of unexplained clinically significant methemoglobinemia have been reported in premature neonates undergoing emergency anesthesia and surgery which included the combined use of fentanyl, pancuronium and atropine. A direct cause and effect relationship between the combined use of these drugs and the reported cases of methemoglobinemia has not been established.

## use_in_specific_populations
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS • Pregnancy : May cause fetal harm. ( 8.1 ) • Lactation : Infants exposed to Fentanyl Citrate Injection through breast milk should be monitored for excess sedation and respiratory depression. ( 8.2 ) • Geriatric Patients : Titrate slowly and monitor for CNS and respiratory depression. ( 8.5 ) 8.1 Pregnancy Risk Summary Use of opioid analgesics for an extended period of time during pregnancy may cause Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome. Available data with Fentanyl Citrate Injection in pregnant women are insufficient to inform a drug‑associated risk for major birth defects and miscarriage ‎or adverse maternal outcomes‎. There are adverse outcomes reported with fetal exposure to opioid analgesics [see Clinical ‎Considerations ] .‎ In animal reproduction studies, fentanyl administration to pregnant rats during organogenesis was embryocidal at doses within the range of the human recommended dosing. No evidence of malformations was noted in animal studies completed to date [see Data ]. The estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. All pregnancies have a background risk of birth defect, loss, or other adverse outcomes. The background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. All ‎pregnancies have a background risk of birth defect, loss, or other adverse outcomes.‎ In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2 to 4% and 15 to 20%, respectively. Clinical Considerations Fetal/Neonatal Adverse Reactions Use of opioid analgesics for an extended period of time during pregnancy for medical or nonmedical purposes can result in physical dependence in the neonate and neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome shortly after birth. Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome presents as irritability, hyperactivity and abnormal sleep pattern, high pitched cry, tremor, vomiting, diarrhea and failure to gain weight. The onset, duration, and severity of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome vary based on the specific opioid used, duration of use, timing and amount of last maternal use, and rate of elimination of the drug by the newborn. Observe newborns for symptoms of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome and manage accordingly. Labor or Delivery Opioids cross the placenta and may produce respiratory depression and psycho-physiologic effects in neonates. An opioid overdose reversal agent, such as naloxone or nalmefene, must be available for reversal of opioid-induced respiratory depression in the neonate. Fentanyl Citrate Injection is not recommended for use in pregnant women during or immediately prior to labor, when other analgesic techniques are more appropriate. Opioid analgesics, including Fentanyl Citrate Injection, can prolong labor through actions which temporarily reduce the strength, duration, and frequency of uterine contractions. However, this effect is not consistent and may be offset by an increased rate of cervical dilation, which tends to shorten labor. Monitor neonates exposed to opioid analgesics during labor for signs of excess sedation and respiratory depression. Data Animal Data Fentanyl has been shown to embryocidal in pregnant rats at doses of 30 mcg/kg intravenously (0.05 times the human dose of 100 mcg/kg on a mg/m 2 basis) and 160 mcg/kg subcutaneously (0.26 times the human dose of 100 mcg/kg on a mg/m 2 basis). There was no evidence of teratogenicity reported. No evidence of malformations or adverse effects on the fetus was reported in a published study in which pregnant rats were administered fentanyl continuously via subcutaneously implanted osmotic minipumps at doses of 10, 100, or 500 mcg/kg/day starting 2-weeks prior to breeding and throughout pregnancy. The high dose was approximately 0.81 times the human dose of 100 mcg/kg on a mg/m 2 basis. 8.2 Lactation Risk Summary Fentanyl is present in breast milk. However, there is insufficient information to determine the effects of fentanyl on the breastfed infant and the effects of fentanyl on milk production. The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother's clinical need for Fentanyl Citrate Injection and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from Fentanyl Citrate Injection or from the underlying maternal condition. Clinical Considerations Monitor infants exposed to Fentanyl Citrate Injection through breast milk for excess sedation and respiratory depression. Withdrawal symptoms can occur in breastfed infants when maternal administration of an opioid analgesic is stopped, or when breast-feeding is stopped. 8.3 Females and Males of Reproductive Potential Infertility Use of opioids for an extended period of time may cause reduced fertility in females and males of reproductive potential. It is not known whether these effects on fertility are reversible [see Adverse Reactions (6) , Clinical Pharmacology (12.2) , Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1) ]. 8.4 Pediatric Use The safety and efficacy of Fentanyl Citrate Injection in children under two years of age has not been established. Rare cases of unexplained clinically significant methemoglobinemia have been reported in premature neonates undergoing emergency anesthesia and surgery which included the combined use of fentanyl, pancuronium and atropine. A direct cause and effect relationship between the combined use of these drugs and the reported cases of methemoglobinemia has not been established. 8.5 Geriatric Use Elderly patients (aged 65 years or older) may have increased sensitivity to fentanyl. In general, use caution when selecting a dosage for an elderly patient, usually starting at the low end of the dosing range, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy. Respiratory depression is the chief risk for elderly patients treated with opioids and has occurred after large initial doses were administered to patients who were not opioid-tolerant or when opioids were co-administered with other agents that depress respiration. Titrate the dosage of Fentanyl Citrate Injection slowly in geriatric patients and monitor closely for signs of central nervous system and respiratory depression [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] . Fentanyl is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of adverse reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function. 8.6 Hepatic Impairment Fentanyl Citrate Injection should be administered with caution to patients with liver dysfunction because of the extensive hepatic metabolism. Reduce the dosage as needed and monitor closely for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension. 8.7 Renal Impairment Fentanyl Citrate Injection should be administered with caution to patients with kidney dysfunction because of the renal excretion of fentanyl and its metabolites. Reduce the dosage as needed and monitor for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension.

## clinical_pharmacology
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 12.1 Mechanism of Action Fentanyl is an opioid agonist whose principal actions of therapeutic value are analgesic and sedation. 12.2 Pharmacodynamics Effects on the Central Nervous System Fentanyl produces respiratory depression by direct action on brain stem respiratory centers. The respiratory depression involves a reduction in the responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to both increases in carbon dioxide tension and electrical stimulation. Fentanyl causes miosis, even in total darkness. Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origins may produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen due to hypoxia in overdose situations. Effects on the Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle Fentanyl causes a reduction in motility associated with an increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be increased to the point of spasm resulting in constipation. Other opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in biliary and pancreatic secretions, spasm of sphincter of Oddi, transient elevations in serum amylase, and opioid-induced esophageal dysfunction (OIED). Effects on the Cardiovascular System Fentanyl produces peripheral vasodilation which may result in orthostatic hypotension or syncope. Manifestations of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, sweating, and/or orthostatic hypotension. Effects on the Endocrine System Opioids inhibit the secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), cortisol, and luteinizing hormone (LH) in humans [see Adverse Reactions (6) ] . They also stimulate prolactin, growth hormone (GH) secretion, and pancreatic secretion of insulin and glucagon. Use of opioids for an extended period of time may influence the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, leading to androgen deficiency that may manifest as low libido, impotence, erectile dysfunction, amenorrhea, or infertility. The causal role of opioids in the clinical syndrome of hypogonadism is unknown because the various medical, physical, lifestyle, and psychological stressors that may influence gonadal hormone levels have not been adequately controlled for in studies conducted to date [see Adverse Reactions (6) ] . Effects on the Immune System Opioids have been shown to have a variety of effects on components of the immune system in in vitro and animal models. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown. Overall, the effects of opioids appear to be modestly immunosuppressive. Concentration–Efficacy Relationships A dose of 100 mcg (0.1 mg) (2.0 mL) of Fentanyl Citrate Injection is approximately equivalent in analgesic activity to 10 mg of morphine or 75 mg of meperidine. The minimum effective analgesic concentration will vary widely among patients, especially among patients who have been previously treated with opioid agonists. The minimum effective analgesic concentration of fentanyl for any individual patient may increase over time due to an increase in pain, the development of a new pain syndrome and/or the development of analgesic tolerance [see Dosage and Administration (2.1 , 2.2) ] . The onset of action of fentanyl is almost immediate when the drug is given intravenously; however, the maximal analgesic effect may not be noted for several minutes. The usual duration of action of the analgesic effect is 30 to 60 minutes after a single intravenous dose of up to 100 mcg (0.1 mg) (2 mL). Following intramuscular administration, the onset of action is from seven to eight minutes, and the duration of action is one to two hours. Concentration–Adverse Reaction Relationships There is a relationship between increasing fentanyl plasma concentration and increasing frequency of dose-related opioid adverse reactions such as nausea, vomiting, CNS effects, and respiratory depression. In opioid-tolerant patients, the situation may be altered by the development of tolerance to opioid-related adverse reactions [see Dosage and Administration (2.1 , 2.2) ] . The onset of action of fentanyl is almost immediate when the drug is given intravenously; however, the maximal respiratory depressant effect may not be noted for several minutes. As with longer acting opioid analgesics, the duration of the respiratory depressant effect of fentanyl may be longer than the analgesic effect. The following observations have been reported concerning altered respiratory response to CO 2 stimulation following administration of fentanyl citrate: • Diminished sensitivity to CO 2 stimulation may persist longer than depression of respiratory rate. (Altered sensitivity to CO 2 stimulation has been demonstrated for up to four hours following a single dose of 600 mcg (0.6 mg) (12 mL) fentanyl citrate to healthy volunteers). Fentanyl frequently slows the respiratory rate, duration and degree of respiratory depression being dose-related. • The peak respiratory depressant effect of a single intravenous dose of Fentanyl Citrate Injection is noted 5 to 15 minutes following injection [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ]. 12.3 Pharmacokinetics Fentanyl Citrate Injection is administered by the intravenous or intramuscular route. The pharmacokinetics of fentanyl can be described as a three-compartment model. Distribution Fentanyl plasma protein binding decreases with increasing ionization of the drug. Alterations in pH may affect its distribution between plasma and the central nervous system. It accumulates in skeletal muscle and fat, and is released slowly into the blood. The volume of distribution for fentanyl is 4 L/kg. It has a distribution time of 1.7 minutes and redistribution time of 13 minutes. Elimination The terminal elimination half-life is 219 minutes. Fentanyl, which is primarily transformed in the liver, demonstrates a high first-pass clearance and releases approximately 75% of an intravenous dose in urine, mostly as metabolites with less than 10% representing the unchanged drug. Approximately 9% of the dose is recovered in the feces, primarily as metabolites.

## pharmacokinetics
12.3 Pharmacokinetics Fentanyl Citrate Injection is administered by the intravenous or intramuscular route. The pharmacokinetics of fentanyl can be described as a three-compartment model. Distribution Fentanyl plasma protein binding decreases with increasing ionization of the drug. Alterations in pH may affect its distribution between plasma and the central nervous system. It accumulates in skeletal muscle and fat, and is released slowly into the blood. The volume of distribution for fentanyl is 4 L/kg. It has a distribution time of 1.7 minutes and redistribution time of 13 minutes. Elimination The terminal elimination half-life is 219 minutes. Fentanyl, which is primarily transformed in the liver, demonstrates a high first-pass clearance and releases approximately 75% of an intravenous dose in urine, mostly as metabolites with less than 10% representing the unchanged drug. Approximately 9% of the dose is recovered in the feces, primarily as metabolites.

## warnings_and_cautions
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS • Risks of Skeletal Muscle Rigidity and Skeletal Muscle Movement : Manage with neuromuscular blocking agent. See full prescribing information for more detail on managing these risks. ( 5.5 ) • Severe Cardiovascular Depression : Monitor during dosage initiation and titration. ( 5.6 ) • Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia and Allodynia : Opioid-Induced ‎Hyperalgesia (OIH) occurs when an opioid analgesic ‎paradoxically causes an increase in pain, or an increase in ‎sensitivity to pain. If OIH is suspected, carefully consider appropriately ‎decreasing the dose of the current opioid analgesic or ‎opioid rotation. ( 5.7 )‎ • Serotonin Syndrome : Potentially life-threatening condition could result from concomitant serotonergic drug administration. Discontinue Fentanyl Citrate Injection if serotonin syndrome is suspected. ( 5.8 ) • Adrenal Insufficiency : If diagnosed, treat with physiologic replacement of corticosteroids, and wean patient off of the opioid. ( 5.9 ) • Risks of Use in Patients with Increased Intracranial Pressure, Brain Tumors, Head Injury, or Impaired Consciousness : Monitor for sedation and respiratory depression. ( 5.10 ) 5.1 Addiction, Abuse, and Misuse Fentanyl Citrate Injection contains fentanyl, a Schedule CII controlled substance. As an opioid, Fentanyl Citrate Injection exposes users to the risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse [see Drug Abuse and Dependence (9) ]. Opioids are sought for nonmedical use and are subject to diversion from ‎legitimate prescribed use. Consider these risks when handling Fentanyl Citrate Injection. Strategies to reduce these risks include proper product storage and control practices for a C-II drug. Contact local state professional licensing board or state-controlled substances authority for information on how to prevent and detect abuse or diversion of this product. 5.2 Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression has been reported with the use of opioids, even when used as recommended. Respiratory depression, if not immediately recognized and treated, may lead to respiratory arrest and death. Adequate facilities should be available for postoperative monitoring and ventilation of patients administered anesthetic doses of Fentanyl Citrate Injection. It is essential that these facilities be fully equipped to handle all degrees of respiratory depression. Management of respiratory depression may include close observation, supportive measures, and use of opioid overdose reversal agents (e.g., naloxone, nalmefene) , depending on the patient's clinical status [see Overdosage (10) ] . Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) retention from opioid-induced respiratory depression can exacerbate the sedating effects of opioids. To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of Fentanyl Citrate Injection are essential [see Dosage and Administration (2) ] . As with other potent opioids, the respiratory depressant effect of fentanyl may persist longer than the measured analgesic effect. The total dose of all opioid agonists administered should be considered by the practitioner before ordering opioid analgesics during recovery from anesthesia. Certain forms of conduction anesthesia, such as spinal anesthesia and some peridural anesthetics, can alter respiration by blocking intercostal nerves. Through other mechanisms [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2) ] Fentanyl Citrate Injection can also alter respiration. Therefore, when Fentanyl Citrate Injection is used to supplement these forms of anesthesia, the anesthetist should be familiar with the physiological alterations involved and be prepared to manage them in the patients selected for these forms of anesthesia. Patients with significant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or cor pulmonale, and those with a substantially decreased respiratory reserve, hypoxia, hypercapnia, or pre-existing respiratory depression are at increased risk of decreased respiratory drive including apnea, even at recommended dosages of Fentanyl Citrate Injection. Elderly, cachectic, or debilitated patients may have altered pharmacokinetics or altered clearance compared to younger, healthier patients resulting in greater risk for respiratory depression. Monitor such patients closely including vital signs, particularly when initiating and titrating Fentanyl Citrate Injection and when Fentanyl Citrate Injection is given concomitantly with other drugs that depress respiration. To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of Fentanyl Citrate Injection are essential [see Dosage and Administration (2) ] . Opioids can cause sleep-related breathing disorders including central sleep apnea (CSA) and sleep-related hypoxemia. Opioid use increases the risk of CSA in a dose-dependent fashion. In patients who present with CSA, consider decreasing the opioid dosage using best practices for opioid taper [see Dosage and Administration (2.1) ] . 5.3 Risks from Concomitant Use with Benzodiazepines or Other Central Nervous System Depressants When benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants are used with Fentanyl Citrate Injection, pulmonary arterial pressure may be decreased. This fact should be considered by those who conduct diagnostic and surgical procedures where interpretation of pulmonary arterial pressure measurements might determine final management of the patient. When high dose or anesthetic dosages of Fentanyl Citrate Injection are employed, even relatively small dosages of diazepam may cause cardiovascular depression. When Fentanyl Citrate Injection is used with CNS depressants, hypotension can occur. If it occurs, consider the possibility of hypovolemia and manage with appropriate parenteral fluid therapy. When operative conditions permit, consider repositioning the patient to improve venous return to the heart. Exercise care in moving and repositioning of patients because of the possibility of orthostatic hypotension. If volume expansion with fluids plus other countermeasures do not correct hypotension, consider administration of pressor agents other than epinephrine. Epinephrine may paradoxically decrease blood pressure in patients treated with a neuroleptic that blocks alpha adrenergic activity. Profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death may result from the concomitant use of Fentanyl Citrate Injection with benzodiazepines and/or other CNS depressants‎, including alcohol‎ (e.g., non-benzodiazepine sedatives/hypnotics, anxiolytics, tranquilizers, muscle relaxants, general anesthetics, antipsychotics, gabapentinoids [gabapentin or pregabalin], and other opioids). Observational studies have demonstrated that concomitant use of opioid analgesics and benzodiazepines increases the risk of drug-related mortality compared to use of opioid analgesics alone. Because of similar pharmacological properties, it is reasonable to expect similar risk with the concomitant use of other CNS depressant drugs with opioid analgesics [see Drug Interactions (7) ] . If the decision is made to manage postoperative pain with Fentanyl Citrate Injection concomitantly with a benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant, start dosing with the lowest effective dosage and titrate based on clinical response. Monitor patients closely for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension. Fluids or other measures to counter hypotension should be available. [see Drug Interactions (7) ] . 5.4 Risks of Concomitant Use or Discontinuation of Cytochrome P450 3A4 Inhibitors and Inducers Concomitant use of Fentanyl Citrate Injection with a CYP3A4 inhibitor, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir), may increase plasma concentrations of fentanyl and prolong opioid adverse reactions, which may exacerbate respiratory depression [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] , particularly when an inhibitor is added after a stable dose of Fentanyl Citrate Injection is achieved. Similarly, discontinuation of a CYP3A4 inducer, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, in Fentanyl Citrate Injection-treated patients may increase fentanyl plasma concentrations and prolong opioid adverse reactions. When using Fentanyl Citrate Injection with CYP3A4 inhibitors or discontinuing CYP3A4 inducers in Fentanyl Citrate Injection-treated patients, monitor patients closely at frequent intervals and consider dosage reduction of Fentanyl Citrate Injection [see Dosage and Administration (2.1) , Drug Interactions (7) ] . Concomitant use of Fentanyl Citrate Injection with CYP3A4 inducers, or discontinuation of a CYP3A4 inhibitor, could result in lower than expected fentanyl plasma concentrations, decreased efficacy, or, possibly, lead to a withdrawal syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to fentanyl. When using Fentanyl Citrate Injection with CYP3A4 inducers or discontinuation of a CYP3A4 inhibitor, monitor patients closely at frequent intervals and consider increasing the fentanyl dosage. [see Dosage and Administration (2.1) , Drug Interactions (7) ] . 5.5 Risks of Muscle Rigidity and Skeletal Muscle Movement Fentanyl Citrate Injection may cause muscle rigidity, particularly involving the muscles of respiration. The incidence and severity of muscle rigidity is dose related. These effects are related to the dose and speed of injection. Skeletal muscle rigidity also has been reported to occur or recur infrequently in the extended postoperative period usually following high dose administration. In addition, skeletal muscle movements of various groups in the extremities, neck, and external eye have been reported during induction of anesthesia with Fentanyl Citrate Injection; these reported movements have, on rare occasions, been strong enough to pose patient management problems. These effects are related to the dose and speed of injection and its incidence can be reduced by: 1) administration of up to 1/4 of the full paralyzing dose of a non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent just prior to administration of Fentanyl Citrate Injection; 2) administration of a full paralyzing dose of a neuromuscular blocking agent following loss of eyelash reflex when Fentanyl Citrate Injection is used in anesthetic doses titrated by slow intravenous infusion; or, 3) simultaneous administration of Fentanyl Citrate Injection and a full paralyzing dose of a neuromuscular blocking agent when Fentanyl Citrate Injection is used in rapidly administered anesthetic dosages. The neuromuscular blocking agent used should be compatible with the patient's cardiovascular status. 5.6 Severe Cardiovascular Depression Fentanyl Citrate Injection may cause severe bradycardia, severe hypotension including orthostatic hypotension, and syncope. There is increased risk in patients whose ability to maintain blood pressure has already been compromised by a reduced blood volume or concurrent administration of certain CNS depressant drugs (e.g., phenothiazines or general anesthetics) [see Drug Interactions (7) ] . In patients with circulatory shock, Fentanyl Citrate Injection may cause vasodilation that can further reduce cardiac output and blood pressure. Monitor these patients for signs of hypotension after initiating or titrating the dosage of Fentanyl Citrate Injection. 5.7 Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia and Allodynia Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia (OIH) occurs when an opioid analgesic ‎paradoxically causes an increase in pain, or an increase in sensitivity to pain. This condition differs from tolerance, which is the need for increasing doses of ‎opioids to maintain a defined effect [see Drug Abuse and Dependence (9.3) ] .‎ Symptoms of OIH ‎include (but may not be limited to) increased levels of pain upon opioid dosage ‎increase, decreased levels of pain upon opioid dosage decrease, or pain from ‎ordinarily non-painful stimuli (allodynia). These symptoms may suggest OIH only ‎if there is no evidence of underlying disease progression, opioid tolerance, ‎opioid withdrawal, or addictive behavior.‎ Cases of OIH have been reported, both with short-term and longer-term use of ‎opioid analgesics. Though the mechanism of OIH is not fully understood, ‎multiple biochemical pathways have been implicated. Medical literature suggests ‎a strong biologic plausibility between opioid analgesics and OIH and allodynia. If ‎a patient is suspected to be experiencing OIH, carefully consider appropriately ‎decreasing the dose of the current opioid analgesic or opioid rotation (safely ‎switching the patient to a different opioid moiety) [see Dosage and ‎Administration (2) , Warnings and Precautions (5.7) ] .‎ 5.8 Serotonin Syndrome with Concomitant Use of Serotonergic Drugs Cases of serotonin syndrome, a potentially life-threatening condition, have been reported during concomitant use of fentanyl with serotonergic drugs. Serotonergic drugs include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), triptans, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, drugs that affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter system (e.g., mirtazapine, trazodone, tramadol), certain muscle relaxants (i.e., cyclobenzaprine, metaxalone), and drugs that impair metabolism of serotonin (including MAO inhibitors, both those intended to treat psychiatric disorders and also others, such as linezolid and intravenous methylene blue) [see Drug Interactions (7) ] . This may occur within the recommended dosage range. Serotonin syndrome symptoms may include mental status changes (e.g., agitation, hallucinations, coma), autonomic instability (e.g., tachycardia, labile blood pressure, hyperthermia), neuromuscular aberrations (e.g., hyperreflexia, incoordination, rigidity), and/or gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) and can be fatal. The onset of symptoms generally occurs within several hours to a few days of concomitant use but may occur later than that. Discontinue Fentanyl Citrate Injection if serotonin syndrome is suspected. 5.9 Adrenal Insufficiency Cases of adrenal insufficiency have been reported with opioid use, more often following greater than one month of use. Presentation of adrenal insufficiency may include non-specific symptoms and signs including nausea, vomiting, anorexia, fatigue, weakness, dizziness, and low blood pressure. If adrenal insufficiency is suspected, confirm the diagnosis with diagnostic testing as soon as possible. If adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed, treat with physiologic replacement doses of corticosteroids. Wean the patient off of the opioid to allow adrenal function to recover and continue corticosteroid treatment until adrenal function recovers. Other opioids may be tried as some cases reported use of a different opioid without recurrence of adrenal insufficiency. The information available does not identify any particular opioids as being more likely to be associated with adrenal insufficiency. 5.10 Risks of Use in Patients with Increased Intracranial Pressure, Brain Tumors, Head Injury or Impaired Consciousness In patients who may be susceptible to the intracranial effects of CO 2 retention (e.g., those with evidence of increased intracranial pressure or brain tumors), Fentanyl Citrate Injection may reduce respiratory drive, and the resultant CO 2 retention can further increase intracranial pressure. Monitor such patients for worsening of signs of increasing intracranial pressure. Monitor patients for signs of sedation and respiratory depression, particularly when initiating therapy with Fentanyl Citrate Injection. Opioids may also obscure the clinical course in a patient with a head injury. Avoid the use of Fentanyl Citrate Injection in patients with impaired consciousness or coma. 5.11 Risks of Gastrointestinal Complications Fentanyl may cause spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. Opioids may cause increases in serum amylase. Monitor patients with biliary tract disease, including acute pancreatitis for worsening symptoms. Cases of opioid-induced esophageal dysfunction (OIED) have been reported in patients taking opioids. The risk of OIED may increase as the dose and/or duration of opioids increases. Regularly evaluate patients for signs and symptoms of OIED (e.g., dysphagia, regurgitation, non-cardiac chest pain) and, if necessary, adjust opioid therapy as clinically appropriate [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2) ] . 5.12 Increased Risk of Seizures in Patients with Seizure Disorders Fentanyl may increase the frequency of seizures in patients with seizure disorders, and may increase the risk of seizures occurring in other clinical settings associated with seizures. Monitor patients with a history of seizure disorders for worsened seizure control during Fentanyl Citrate Injection therapy. 5.13 Risks of Driving and Operating Machinery Fentanyl may impair the mental or physical abilities needed to perform potentially hazardous activities such as driving a car or operating machinery. Warn patients not to drive or operate dangerous machinery after Fentanyl Citrate Injection administration. 5.14 Risks due to Interaction with Neuroleptic Agents Many neuroleptic agents have been associated with QT prolongation, torsades de pointes, and cardiac arrest. Administer neuroleptic agents with extreme caution in the presence of risk factors for development of prolonged QT syndrome and torsades de pointes, such as: 1) clinically significant bradycardia (less than 50 bpm), 2) any clinically significant cardiac disease, including baseline prolonged QT interval, 3) treatment with Class 1 and Class III antiarrhythmics, 4) treatment with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI's), 5) concomitant treatment with other drug products known to prolong the QT interval and 6) electrolyte imbalance, in particular hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia, or concomitant treatment with drugs (e.g., diuretics) that may cause electrolyte imbalance. Elevated blood pressure, with and without pre-existing hypertension, has been reported following administration of Fentanyl Citrate Injection combined with a neuroleptic. This might be due to unexplained alterations in sympathetic activity following large doses; however, it is also frequently attributed to anesthetic and surgical stimulation during light anesthesia. ECG monitoring is indicated when a neuroleptic agent is used in conjunction with Fentanyl Citrate Injection as an anesthetic premedication, for the induction of anesthesia, or as an adjunct in the maintenance of general or regional anesthesia. When Fentanyl Citrate Injection is used with a neuroleptic and an EEG is used for postoperative monitoring, the EEG pattern may return to normal slowly.

## contraindications
4 CONTRAINDICATIONS Fentanyl Citrate Injection is contraindicated in patients with: • Hypersensitivity to fentanyl (e.g., anaphylaxis) [see Adverse Reactions (6) ]. • Hypersensitivity to fentanyl. ( 4 )

## description
11 DESCRIPTION Fentanyl Citrate Injection is an opioid agonist. Fentanyl Citrate Injection, is a sterile, nonpyrogenic solution of fentanyl citrate in water for injection, available as 50 mcg (0.05 mg) per mL which is administered only by the intravenous or intramuscular routes of injection. The chemical name is N-(1-phenethyl-4-piperidyl) propionanilide citrate (1:1). The molecular weight is 528.60. Its molecular formula is C 22 H 28 N 2 O∙C 6 H 8 O 7 , and it has the following chemical structure. Fentanyl citrate, a white powder which is sparingly soluble in water. Each milliliter contains fentanyl (as the citrate) 50 mcg (0.05 mg). May contain sodium hydroxide and/or hydrochloric acid for pH adjustment. pH 4.7 (4.0 to 7.5). The solution contains no bacteriostat, antimicrobial agent or added buffer and is intended only for use as a single-dose injection. When smaller doses are required, the unused portion should be discarded in an appropriate manner. Chemical Structure

## package_label_principal_display_panel
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 10 mL Ampule Label 10 mL Single-dose Rx only NDC 0409-9093-41 Discard unused portion Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP 500 mcg Fentanyl/10 mL (50 mcg/mL) CII FOR INTRAVENOUS USE BY HOSPITAL PERSONNEL SPECIFICALLY TRAINED IN THE USE OF NARCOTIC ANALGESICS. PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 10 mL Ampule Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 10 mL Ampule Carton 10 mL Single-dose 5 Ampuls Discard unused portion NDC 0409-9093-36 Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP 500 mcg Fentanyl/10 mL (50 mcg/mL) CII Hospira Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. Each mL contains fentanyl (as the citrate) 50 mcg (0.05 mg). May contain sodium hydroxide and/or hydrochloric acid for pH adjustment. pH 4.7 (4.0 to 7.5). Sterile, nonpyrogenic. Usual dose: See insert. Store at 20 to 25°C (68 to 77°F). [See USP Controlled Room Temperature.] PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 10 mL Ampule Carton
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Ampule Label 20 mL Single-dose Discard unused portion Rx only Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP 1000 mcg Fentanyl/20 mL (50 mcg/mL) FOR INTRAVENOUS USE BY HOSPITAL PERSONNEL SPECIFICALLY TRAINED IN THE USE OF NARCOTIC ANALGESICS. Distributed by Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA NDC 0409-9093-31 Each mL contains fentanyl (as the citrate) 50 mcg (0.05 mg). May contain NaOH and/or HCl for pH adjustment. pH 4.7 (4.0 to 7.5). Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. Store at 20 to 25°C (68 to 77°F). [See USP Controlled Room Temperature.] CII Hospira RL-7316 LOT ##-###-AA EXP DMMMYYYY PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Ampule Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Ampule Carton 20 mL Single-dose 5 Ampuls NDC 0409-9093-38 Contains 5 of NDC 0409-9093-31 Discard unused portion Rx only Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP 1000 mcg Fentanyl/20 mL (50 mcg/mL) CII Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. FOR INTRAVENOUS ADMINISTRATION BY HOSPITAL PERSONNEL SPECIFICALLY TRAINED IN THE USE OF NARCOTIC ANALGESICS. Distributed by Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Ampule Carton
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 2 mL Vial Label 2 mL Single-dose NDC 0409-9094-12 Rx only Intravenous or Intramuscular Use Fentanyl Citrate Inj., USP CII 100 mcg Fentanyl/2 mL (50 mcg/mL) Distributed by Hospira, Inc. Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA Hospira PAA224401 PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 2 mL Vial Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 2 mL Vial Tray Top 2 mL Single-dose 25 Fliptop Vials Discard unused portion. NDC 0409-9094-22 Contains 25 of NDC 0409-9094-12 Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP 100 mcg Fentanyl/2 mL (50 mcg/mL) CII Protect from light. Retain in tray until time of use. For Intravenous or Intramuscular use. Rx only CA-7136 Distributed by Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 2 mL Vial Tray Top
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 2 mL Vial Tray 2 mL Single-dose 25 Fliptop Vials NDC 0409-9094-22 Discard unused portion. Fentanyl Citrate Inj., USP 100 mcg Fentanyl/2 mL (50 mcg/mL) Rx only CII Retain in tray until time of use. Protect from light. For Intravenous or Intramuscular use. Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 2 mL Vial Tray
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 5 mL Vial Label 5 mL Single-dose Vial Rx only NDC 0409-9094-18 Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 250 mcg Fentanyl/5 mL (50 mcg/mL) For I.V. or I.M. use. Protect from light. Retain in tray until time of use. Dist. by Hospira, Inc. Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 5 mL Vial Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 5 mL Vial Tray Top 5 mL Single-dose 25 Fliptop Vials Rx only NDC 0409-9094-25 Contains 25 of NDC 0409-9094-18 Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 250 mcg Fentanyl/5 mL (50 mcg/mL) For Intravenous or Intramuscular use. Protect from light. Retain in tray until time of use. Discard unused portion. Distributed by Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA Hospira CA-7140 PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 5 mL Vial Tray Top
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 5 mL Vial Tray 5 mL Single-dose Vials 25 Units NDC 0409-9094-25 Rx only Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 250 mcg Fentanyl/5 mL (50 mcg/mL) INTRAVENOUS or INTRAMUSCULAR USE. Protect from light. Retain in tray until time of use. Discard unused portion. Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 5 mL Vial Tray
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 10 mL Vial Label 10 mL Single-dose Vial NDC 0409-9094-17 Discard unused portion. Rx only Fentanyl Citrate Inj., USP 500 mcg Fentanyl/10 mL (50 mcg/mL) CII Distributed by Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 10 mL Vial Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 10 mL Vial Tray 10 mL Single-dose 25 Fliptop Vials Discard unused portion NDC 0409-9094-28 Contains 25 of NDC 0409-9094-17 Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 500 mcg Fentanyl/10 mL (50 mcg/mL) Rx only Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 10 mL Vial Tray
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Vial Label 20 mL Single-dose Vial NDC 0409-9094-16 Discard unused portion. Rx only Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 1000 mcg Fentanyl/20 mL (50 mcg/mL) Distributed by Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Vial Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Vial Tray 20 mL Single-dose 25 Fliptop Vials Discard unused portion. Rx only NDC 0409-9094-31 Contains 25 of NDC 0409-9094-16 Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 1000 mcg Fentanyl/20 mL (50 mcg/mL) Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Vial Tray
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Label 50 mL Single-dose Vial Discard unused portion. NDC 0409-9094-41 Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 2500 mcg Fentanyl/50 mL (50 mcg/mL) Rx only Distributed by Hospira, Inc. Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Carton One/NDC 0409-9094-41 Rx only 50 mL Single-dose Fliptop Vial Discard unused portion. Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 2500 mcg Fentanyl/50 mL (50 mcg/mL) Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Carton
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Carton Tray 50 mL Single-dose 25 Fliptop Vials Discard unused portion. NDC 0409-9094-61 Contains 25 of NDC 0409-9094-41 Rx only Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 2500 mcg Fentanyl/50 mL (50 mcg/mL) Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Carton Tray
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Label-9094 50 mL Single-dose Vial Discard unused portion. NDC 0409-9094-44 Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 2500 mcg Fentanyl/50 mL (50 mcg/mL) Rx only Distributed by Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Label-9094
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Carton-9094 One/NDC 0409-9094-55 Rx only 50 mL Single-dose Fliptop Vial Discard unused portion. Fentanyl Citrate Injection, USP CII 2500 mcg Fentanyl/50 mL (50 mcg/mL) Protect from light. Retain in carton until time of use. PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Carton-9094