URL: https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=ee8057d1-ed12-4e18-9efa-d83504abf612
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: Public domain (US Government work, FDA-approved labeling)

openFDA label | set_id ee8057d1-ed12-4e18-9efa-d83504abf612 | version 7 | effective 20251231 | Morphine Sulfate; Morphine sulfate | Hospira, Inc.

## boxed_warning
WARNING: SERIOUS AND LIFE-THREATENING RISKS FROM USE OF MORPHINE SULFATE INJECTION WARNING: SERIOUS AND LIFE-THREATENING RISKS FROM USE OF MORPHINE SULFATE INJECTION See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning. • Morphine Sulfate Injection exposes users to risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse, which can lead to overdose and death. Assess patient’s risk before prescribing and reassess regularly for these behaviors and conditions. ( 5.1 ) • Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression may occur with use of Morphine Sulfate Injection, especially during initiation or following a dosage increase. To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of ‎Morphine Sulfate Injection are essential. ( 5.2 ) • Concomitant use of opioids with benzodiazepines or other central nervous system (CNS) depressants, including alcohol, may result in profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death. Reserve concomitant prescribing for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are inadequate. ( 5.3 , 7 ) • Advise pregnant women using opioids for an extended period of time of the risk of Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome, which may be life-threatening if not recognized and treated. Ensure that management by neonatology expert will be available at delivery. ( 5.4 ) Addiction, Abuse, and Misuse Because the use of Morphine Sulfate Injection exposes patients and other users to the risks of opioid addiction, abuse, and misuse, which can lead to overdose and death, assess each patient's risk prior to prescribing and reassess all patients regularly for the development of these behaviors and conditions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ] . Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression may occur with use of Morphine Sulfate Injection, especially during initiation or following a dosage increase. To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of ‎Morphine Sulfate ‎Injection are essential [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ]. Risks from Concomitant Use with Benzodiazepines or Other CNS Depressants Concomitant use of opioids with benzodiazepines or other central nervous system (CNS) depressants, including alcohol, may result in profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death. Reserve concomitant prescribing of Morphine Sulfate Injection and benzodiazepines ‎or other CNS depressants for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are ‎inadequate [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) , Drug Interactions (7) ] . Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome (NOWS) Advise pregnant women using opioids for an extended period of time of the risk of Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome, which may be life-threatening if not recognized and treated. Ensure that management by neonatology expert will be available at delivery [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) ] .

## indications_and_usage
1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE Morphine Sulfate Injection is indicated in adult and pediatric patients for the management of pain severe enough to require an opioid analgesic and for which alternative treatments are inadequate. Morphine Sulfate Injection is an opioid agonist indicated in adult and pediatric patients for the management of pain severe enough to require an opioid analgesic and for which alternative treatments are inadequate. ( 1 ) Limitations of Use Because of the risks of addiction, abuse, misuse, overdose, and death, which can occur at any dosage or duration and persist over the course of therapy, reserve opioid analgesics, including Morphine Sulfate Injection, for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are ineffective, not tolerated, or would be otherwise inadequate to provide sufficient management of pain. ( 1 , 5.1 ) Limitations of Use: Because of the risks of addiction, abuse, misuse, overdose, and death , which can occur at any dosage or duration and persist over the course of therapy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ] , reserve opioid analgesics, including Morphine Sulfate Injection, for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are ineffective, not tolerated, or would be otherwise inadequate to provide sufficient management of pain.

## dosage_and_administration
2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION • Morphine Sulfate Injection should be prescribed only by healthcare ‎professionals who are knowledgeable about the use of opioids and how ‎to ‎mitigate the associated risks. ( 2.1 )‎ • Use the lowest effective dosage for the shortest duration of time consistent with individual patient treatment goals. Reserve titration to higher ‎doses of Morphine Sulfate Injection for patients in whom lower doses are ‎‎insufficiently effective and in whom the expected benefits of using a ‎higher dose opioid clearly outweigh the substantial risks. ( 2.1 , 5 )‎ • Many acute pain conditions (e.g., the pain that occurs with a number ‎of surgical procedures or acute musculoskeletal injuries) require no ‎more ‎than a few days of an opioid analgesic. Clinical guidelines on ‎opioid prescribing for some acute pain conditions are available. ( 2.1 )‎ • Initiate the dosing regimen for each patient ‎individually, taking into account the patient’s underlying cause and ‎severity of ‎pain, prior analgesic treatment and response, and risk ‎factors for addiction, abuse, and misuse. ( 2.1 , 5.1 )‎ • Respiratory depression can occur at any time during opioid therapy, ‎especially when initiating and following dosage increases with ‎Morphine ‎Sulfate Injection. Consider this risk when selecting an initial ‎dose and when making dose adjustments. ( 2.1 , 5.2 )‎ • Do not inject directly. Morphine Sulfate Injection is intended for continuous intravenous infusion only, after dilution in large volume parenteral solutions. ( 2.1 , 2.5 ) • Initial and maintenance dosage in adults : See full prescribing information for recommended dosages in adult patients. ( 2.2 , 2.3 ) • Initial and maintenance dosage in pediatric patients : See full prescribing information for recommended dosage in pediatric patients. ( 2.2 , 2.3 ) • Periodically reassess patients receiving Morphine Sulfate Injection to evaluate the continued need for opioid analgesics to maintain pain control, for the signs or symptoms of adverse reactions, and for the development of addiction, abuse, or misuse. ( 2.3 ) • Do not rapidly reduce or abruptly discontinue Morphine Sulfate Injection in a physically-dependent patient. ( 2.4 , 5.14 ) • See full prescribing information for preparation and storage instructions. ( 2.5 ) 2.1 Important Dosage and Administration Instructions • Morphine Sulfate Injection is for intravenous use only. It is not for intrathecal or epidural use. • Do not inject directly. Morphine Sulfate Injection is intended for continuous intravenous infusion only, after dilution in large volume parenteral solutions [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) ] . • Dosing errors can result in accidental overdose and death. Avoid dosing errors that may result from confusion between mg and mL and confusion with morphine injections of different concentrations when prescribing, dispensing, and administering Morphine Sulfate Injection. Ensure that the dose is communicated and dispensed accurately. • Morphine Sulfate Injection should be prescribed only by healthcare ‎professionals who are ‎knowledgeable about the use of opioids and how ‎to mitigate the associated risks.‎ • Use the lowest effective dosage for the shortest duration of time consistent with individual patient treatment goals [see Warnings and Precautions (5) ] . Because the risk of overdose increases as opioid doses ‎increase, reserve titration to higher doses of ‎Morphine Sulfate Injection for ‎patients in whom lower doses are insufficiently effective and in whom ‎the ‎expected benefits of using a higher dose opioid clearly outweigh the ‎substantial risks.‎ • Many acute pain conditions (e.g., the pain that occurs with a number ‎of surgical procedures or acute ‎musculoskeletal injuries) require no ‎more than a few days of an opioid analgesic. Clinical guidelines on ‎‎opioid prescribing for some acute pain conditions are available.‎ • There is variability in the opioid analgesic dose and duration needed to ‎adequately manage pain due ‎both to the cause of pain and to ‎individual patient factors. ‎Initiate the dosing regimen for each patient individually, taking into account the patient's underlying cause and severity of pain, prior analgesic treatment and response, and risk factors for addiction, abuse, and misuse [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ] . • Respiratory depression can occur at any time during opioid therapy, especially when initiating and following dosage increases with Morphine Sulfate Injection. Consider this risk when selecting an initial dose and when making dose adjustments [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] . • Morphine must be injected slowly; rapid intravenous administration may result in chest wall rigidity. • Inspect Morphine Sulfate Injection for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration. Do not use if color is darker than pale yellow, if it is discolored in any other way, or if it contains a precipitate. 2.2 Initial Dosage Continuous Intravenous Infusion Use the lowest dose necessary to achieve adequate analgesia.‎ Adults Adults: Initiate treatment in a dosing range of 0.02 mg/kg/hour to 0.1 mg/kg/hour as needed. The dosage should be titrated according to the patient's response [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) ]. For opioid-naïve patients, a maximum dosing rate should not exceed 10 mg/hour. For opioid-tolerant patients, including patients who, because of their condition, have a high analgesic requirement (e.g., terminal cancer pain), dosing rates as high as 30 mg/hour or higher may be required to manage pain. Pediatric patients Patients 1 to less than 17 years old: Initiate intravenous infusion in patients 1 to less than 17 years old as follows: • Less than 50 kg body weight: 20 mcg/kg/hour to 30 mcg/kg/hour (0.02 mg/kg/hour to 0.03 mg/kg/hour) • Greater than or equal to 50 kg body weight: 1,500 mcg/hour (1.5 mg/hour) Patients less than 1 year old, including neonates: • Initiate treatment in a dosing range of 0.005 mg/kg/hour to 0.01 mg/kg/hour. • Cardiorespiratory function should be monitored in patients less than 3 months of age. The infusion rate should be adjusted based on clinical signs of inadequate pain relief and/or increased somnolence. • For premature infants and former premature infants with chronic lung disease and up to 5 to 6 months of age, careful monitoring for depressed hypoxic drive is required following opioid administration. The dosage should be titrated according to the patient's response [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) ]. For opioid-tolerant patients, including patients with a high analgesic requirement (e.g., terminal cancer pain, sickle-cell disease crisis), higher initial doses may be required. 2.3 Titration and Maintenance of Therapy Titrate the dose based upon the individual patient’s response to their initial dose ‎of Morphine Sulfate ‎Injection.‎ Individually titrate Morphine Sulfate Injection to a dosage that provides adequate analgesia and minimizes adverse reactions. Continually reevaluate patients receiving Morphine Sulfate Injection to assess the maintenance of pain control, signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal, and other adverse reactions, as well to reassess for the development of addiction, abuse, or misuse [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1 , 5.14) ] . If after increasing the dosage, unacceptable opioid‑related adverse reactions are observed, ‎(including an increase in pain after dosage increase)‎,‎ consider reducing the dosage ‎[see Warnings and Precautions (5) ] ‎. Adjust the dosage to obtain an appropriate balance between management of pain and opioid-related adverse reactions. Pediatric patients Patients 1 to less than 17 years old: Recommended maintenance dosage for patients 1 to less than 17 years old is as follows: • Less than 60 kg body weight: 10 mcg/kg/hour to 60 mcg/kg/hour (0.01 mg/kg/hour to 0.06 mg/kg/hour) • Greater than or equal to 60 kg body weight: 0.8 mg/hour to 3 mg/hour The maintenance dosage in pediatric patients should be adjusted based on individual patient's needs to obtain an appropriate balance between effective pain management and opioid-related adverse reactions. 2.4 Safe Reduction and Discontinuation of Morphine Sulfate Injection When a patient who has been taking Morphine Sulfate Injection regularly and may be physically dependent no longer requires therapy with Morphine Sulfate Injection, taper the dose gradually, by 25% to 50% every 2 to 4 days, while monitoring carefully for signs and symptoms of withdrawal. If the patient develops these signs or symptoms, raise the dose to the previous level and taper more slowly, either by increasing the interval between decreases, decreasing the amount of change in dose, or both. Do not rapidly reduce or abruptly discontinue Morphine Sulfate Injection in patients who may be physically dependent on opioids [see Warnings and Precautions (5.14) , Drug Abuse and Dependence (9.3) ] . 2.5 Preparation of Solutions for Infusion Morphine Sulfate Injection is incompatible with admixtures of soluble barbiturates, chlorothiazide, aminophylline, heparin, meperidine, methicillin, phenytoin, sodium bicarbonate, iodide, sulfadiazine and sulfisoxazole. Single-dose Flip Top Vial Morphine Sulfate Injection USP, 1,000 mg/20 mL (50 mg/mL), and 2,500 mg/50 mL (50 mg/mL) single-dose vials are for the preparation of large volume parenteral solutions and are not for direct injection. Dilute Morphine Sulfate Injection in either Dextrose 5% injection or Sodium Chloride 0.9% injection to a final concentration of 0.1 mg/mL to 5 mg/mL, as determined by the patient's needs, prior to administration (see Table 1 for instructions regarding dilution). Preparations in Sodium Chloride 0.9% injection are stable for 14 days at room temperature [20°C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F)] or under refrigerated conditions [2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F)]. Preparations in Dextrose 5% injection are stable for up to 72 hours at room temperature [20°C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F)] or for 14 days under refrigerated conditions [2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F)]. Table 1: Examples of Infusion Preparation Concentration Diluent Final Concentration Morphine Sulfate Morphine 50 mg/mL 5% Dextrose or 0.9% NaCl 20 mL vial 980 mL 1 mg/mL 50 mL vial 950 mL 2.5 mg/mL

## dosage_and_administration_table
Table 1: Examples of Infusion Preparation

Concentration | Diluent | Final Concentration Morphine Sulfate

Morphine 50 mg/mL | 5% Dextrose or 0.9% NaCl |

20 mL vial | 980 mL | 1 mg/mL

50 mL vial | 950 mL | 2.5 mg/mL

## dosage_forms_and_strengths
3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS Morphine Sulfate Injection, USP is available as single-dose flip top vials for the preparation of large volume parenteral solutions in the following presentations: • 1,000 mg/20 mL (50 mg/mL) clear and colorless to pale yellow solution, and • 2,500 mg/50 mL (50 mg/mL) clear and colorless to pale yellow solution Morphine Sulfate Injection, USP is available in 1,000 mg/20 mL (50 mg/mL) and 2,500 mg/50 mL (50 mg/mL) single-dose flip top vials. ( 3 )

## how_supplied
16 HOW SUPPLIED/STORAGE AND HANDLING Morphine Sulfate Injection, USP is a clear and colorless to pale yellow solution supplied as a sterile solution in glass, single-dose flip top vials for the preparation of large volume parenteral solutions. Unit of Sale Concentration NDC 0409-1896-20 Carton containing 1 Single-Dose Flip Top Vial 1,000 mg/20 mL (50 mg/mL) NDC 0409-2022-01 Carton containing 1 Single-Dose Flip Top Vial 2,500 mg/50 mL (50 mg/mL) Store at 20°C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F) [See USP Controlled Room Temperature] until ready to use. PROTECT FROM LIGHT. DO NOT FREEZE. Contains no preservative or antioxidant. DISCARD ANY UNUSED PORTION. DO NOT HEAT-STERILIZE.

## storage_and_handling
Store at 20°C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F) [See USP Controlled Room Temperature] until ready to use. PROTECT FROM LIGHT. DO NOT FREEZE. Contains no preservative or antioxidant. DISCARD ANY UNUSED PORTION. DO NOT HEAT-STERILIZE.

## pediatric_use
8.4 Pediatric Use The safety and effectiveness of morphine continuous intravenous infusion in pain management have been established in pediatric patients for all age groups. Use of morphine continuous intravenous infusion for pain management in pediatric patients is supported by evidence from randomized controlled studies in pediatric patients. Monitor cardiorespiratory function in patients less than 3 months of age. Adjust the infusion rate based on clinical signs of inadequate pain relief and/or increased somnolence [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) ] . For premature infants and former premature infants with chronic lung disease and up to 5 to 6 months of age, careful monitoring for depressed hypoxic drive is required following opioid administration [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) ] .

## use_in_specific_populations
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS • Pregnancy : May cause fetal harm. ( 8.1 ) • Geriatric Patients : Use caution during dose selection, starting at the low ‎end of the dosing range while carefully monitoring for side effects. ‎‎( 8.5 ) 8.1 Pregnancy Risk Summary Use of opioid analgesics for an extended period of time during pregnancy can cause neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) ] . There are no available data with Morphine Sulfate Injection in pregnant women to inform a drug-associated risk for major birth defects and miscarriage or adverse maternal outcomes‎.‎ There are adverse outcomes reported with fetal exposure to opioid analgesics [see Clinical ‎‎Considerations ]‎ . Published studies with morphine use during pregnancy have not reported a clear association with morphine and major birth defects [see Human Data ] . In published animal reproduction studies, morphine administered subcutaneously during the early gestational period produced neural tube defects (i.e., exencephaly and cranioschisis) at 5 and 16 times the human daily dose of 60 mg based on body surface area (HDD) in hamsters and mice, respectively, lower fetal body weight and increased incidence of abortion at 0.4 times the HDD in the rabbit, growth retardation at 6 times the HDD in the rat, and axial skeletal fusion and cryptorchidism at 16 times the HDD in the mouse. Administration of morphine sulfate to pregnant rats during organogenesis and through lactation resulted in cyanosis, hypothermia, decreased brain weights, pup mortality, decreased pup body weights, and adverse effects on reproductive tissues at 3–4 times the HDD; and long-term neurochemical changes in the brain of offspring which correlate with altered behavioral responses that persist through adulthood at exposures comparable to and less than the HDD [see Animal Data ] . Based on animal data, advise pregnant women of the potential risk to a fetus. The background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. All pregnancies have a background risk of birth defect, loss, or other adverse outcomes. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2 to 4% and 15 to 20%, respectively. Clinical Considerations Fetal/Neonatal Adverse Reactions Use of opioid analgesics for an extended period of time during pregnancy for medical or nonmedical purposes can result in physical dependence in the neonate and neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome shortly after birth. Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome presents as irritability, hyperactivity and abnormal sleep pattern, high pitched cry, tremor, vomiting, diarrhea, and failure to gain weight. The onset, duration, and severity of neonatal withdrawal syndrome vary based on the specific opioid used, duration of use, timing and amount of last maternal use, and rate of elimination of the drug by the newborn. Observe newborns for signs of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome and manage accordingly [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) ] . Labor or Delivery Opioids cross the placenta and may produce respiratory depression and psycho-physiologic effects in neonates. An opioid overdose reversal agent, such as naloxone or nalmefene, must be available for reversal of opioid induced respiratory depression in the neonate. Morphine Sulfate Injection is not recommended for use in women during and immediately prior to labor, when use of shorter-acting analgesics or other analgesic techniques are more appropriate. Opioid analgesics, including Morphine Sulfate Injection, can prolong labor through actions that temporarily reduce the strength, duration, and frequency of uterine contractions. However, this effect is not consistent and may be offset by an increased rate of cervical dilatation, which tends to shorten labor. Monitor neonates exposed to opioid analgesics during labor for signs of excess sedation and respiratory depression. Data Human Data The results from a population-based prospective cohort, including 70 women exposed to morphine during the first trimester of pregnancy and 448 women exposed to morphine at any time during pregnancy, indicate no increased risk for congenital malformations. However, these studies cannot definitely establish the absence of any risk because of methodological limitations, including small sample size and non-randomized study design. Animal Data Formal reproductive and developmental toxicology studies for morphine have not been conducted. Exposure margins for the following published study reports are based on human daily dose of 60 mg morphine using a body surface area comparison (HDD). Neural tube defects (exencephaly and cranioschisis) were noted following subcutaneous administration of morphine sulfate (35–322 mg/kg) on Gestation Day 8 to pregnant hamsters (4.7 to 43.5 times the HDD). A no adverse effect level was not defined in this study and the findings cannot be clearly attributed to maternal toxicity. Neural tube defects (exencephaly), axial skeletal fusions, and cryptorchidism were reported following a single subcutaneous injection of morphine sulfate to pregnant mice (100–500 mg/kg) on Gestation Day 8 or 9 at 200 mg/kg or greater (16 times the HDD) and fetal resorption at 400 mg/kg or higher (32 times the HDD). No adverse effects were noted following 100 mg/kg morphine in this model (8 times the HDD). In one study, following continuous subcutaneous infusion of doses greater than or equal to 2.72 mg/kg to mice (0.2 times the HDD), exencephaly, hydronephrosis, intestinal hemorrhage, split supraoccipital, malformed sternebrae, and malformed xiphoid were noted. The effects were reduced with increasing daily dose; possibly due to rapid induction of tolerance under these infusion conditions. The clinical significance of this report is not clear. Decreased fetal weights were observed in pregnant rats treated with 20 mg/kg/day morphine sulfate (3.2 times the HDD) from Gestation Day 7 to 9. There was no evidence of malformations despite maternal toxicity (10% mortality). In a second rat study, decreased fetal weight and increased incidences of growth retardation were noted at 35 mg/kg/day (5.7 times the HDD) and there was a reduced number of fetuses at 70 mg/kg/day (11.4 times the HDD) when pregnant rats were treated with 10, 35, or 70 mg/kg/day morphine sulfate via continuous infusion from Gestation Day 5 to 20. There was no evidence of fetal malformations or maternal toxicity. An increased incidence of abortion was noted in a study in which pregnant rabbits were treated with 2.5 (0.8 times the HDD) to 10 mg/kg morphine sulfate via subcutaneous injection from Gestation Day 6 to 10. In a second study, decreased fetal body weights were reported following treatment of pregnant rabbits with increasing doses of morphine (10–50 mg/kg/day) during the pre-mating period and 50 mg/kg/day (16 times the HDD) throughout the gestation period. No overt malformations were reported in either publication; although only limited endpoints were evaluated. In published studies in rats, exposure to morphine during gestation and/or lactation periods is associated with: decreased pup viability at 12.5 mg/kg/day or greater (2 times the HDD); decreased pup body weights at 15 mg/kg/day or greater (2.4 times the HDD); decreased litter size, decreased absolute brain and cerebellar weights, cyanosis, and hypothermia at 20 mg/kg/day (3.2 times the HDD); alteration of behavioral responses (play, social-interaction) at 1 mg/kg/day or greater (0.2 times the HDD); alteration of maternal behaviors (e.g., decreased nursing and pup retrievals) in mice at 1 mg/kg or higher (0.08 times the HDD) and rats at 1.5 mg/kg/day or higher (0.2 times the HDD); and a host of behavioral abnormalities in the offspring of rats, including altered responsiveness to opioids at 4 mg/kg/day (0.7 times the HDD) or greater. Fetal and/or postnatal exposure to morphine in mice and rats has been shown to result in morphological changes in fetal and neonatal brain and neuronal cell loss, alteration of a number of neurotransmitter and neuromodulator systems, including opioid and non-opioid systems, and impairment in various learning and memory tests that appear to persist into adulthood. These studies were conducted with morphine treatment usually in the range of 4 to 20 mg/kg/day (0.7 to 3.2 times the HDD). Additionally, delayed sexual maturation and decreased sexual behaviors in female offspring at 20 mg/kg/day (3.2 times the HDD), and decreased plasma and testicular levels of luteinizing hormone and testosterone, decreased testes weights, seminiferous tubule shrinkage, germinal cell aplasia, and decreased spermatogenesis in male offspring were also observed at 20 mg/kg/day (3.2 times the HDD). Decreased litter size and viability were observed in the offspring of male rats that were intraperitoneally administered morphine sulfate for 1 day prior to mating at 25 mg/kg/day (4.1 times the HDD) and mated to untreated females. Decreased viability and body weight and/or movement deficits in both first and second generation offspring were reported when male mice were treated for 5 days with escalating doses of 120 to 240 mg/kg/day morphine sulfate (9.7 to 19.5 times the HDD) or when female mice treated with escalating doses of 60 to 240 mg/kg/day (4.9 to 19.5 times the HDD) followed by a 5-day treatment-free recovery period prior to mating. Similar multigenerational findings were also seen in female rats pre-gestationally treated with escalating doses of 10 to 22 mg/kg/day morphine (1.6 to 3.6 times the HDD). 8.2 Lactation Risk Summary Morphine is present in breast milk. Published lactation studies report variable concentrations of morphine in breast milk with administration of immediate-release morphine to nursing mothers in the early postpartum period with a milk-to-plasma morphine AUC ratio of 2.5:1 measured in one lactation study. However, there is insufficient information to determine the effects of morphine on the breastfed infant and the effects of morphine on milk production. Lactation studies have not been conducted with Morphine Sulfate Injection, and no information is available on the effects of the drug on the breastfed infant or the effects of the drug on milk production. The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother's clinical need for Morphine Sulfate Injection, and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from Morphine Sulfate Injection, or from the underlying maternal condition. Clinical Considerations Monitor infants exposed to Morphine Sulfate Injection through breast milk for excess sedation and respiratory depression. Withdrawal symptoms can occur in breastfed infants when maternal administration of morphine is stopped, or when breastfeeding is stopped. 8.3 Females and Males of Reproductive Potential Infertility Use of opioids for an extended period of time may cause reduced fertility in females and males of reproductive potential. It is not known whether these effects on fertility are reversible [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2) ]. In published animal studies, morphine administration adversely effected fertility and reproductive endpoints in male rats and prolonged estrus cycle in female rats [see Nonclinical Toxicology (13) ]. 8.4 Pediatric Use The safety and effectiveness of morphine continuous intravenous infusion in pain management have been established in pediatric patients for all age groups. Use of morphine continuous intravenous infusion for pain management in pediatric patients is supported by evidence from randomized controlled studies in pediatric patients. Monitor cardiorespiratory function in patients less than 3 months of age. Adjust the infusion rate based on clinical signs of inadequate pain relief and/or increased somnolence [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) ] . For premature infants and former premature infants with chronic lung disease and up to 5 to 6 months of age, careful monitoring for depressed hypoxic drive is required following opioid administration [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) ] . 8.5 Geriatric Use The pharmacodynamic effects of morphine in the elderly are more variable than in the younger population. Older patients will vary widely in the effective initial dose, rate of development of tolerance and the frequency and magnitude of associated adverse effects as the dose is increased. Initial elderly patients (aged 65 years or older) may have increased sensitivity to morphine. In general, use caution when selecting a dosage for an elderly patient, usually starting at the low end of the dosing range, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy. Respiratory depression is the chief risk for elderly patients treated with opioids, and has occurred after large initial doses were administered to patients who were not opioid-tolerant or when opioids were co-administered with other agents that depress respiration. Titrate the dosage of Morphine Sulfate Injection slowly in geriatric patients and monitor closely for signs of central nervous system and respiratory depression [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) ] . Morphine is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of adverse reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function. 8.6 Hepatic Impairment Morphine pharmacokinetics have been reported to be significantly altered in patients with cirrhosis. Start these patients with a lower than normal dosage of Morphine Sulfate Injection and titrate slowly while monitoring for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) ]. 8.7 Renal Impairment Morphine pharmacokinetics are altered in patients with renal failure. Start these patients with a lower than normal dosage of Morphine Sulfate Injection and titrate slowly while monitoring for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) ].

## clinical_pharmacology
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 12.1 Mechanism of Action Morphine is a full opioid agonist and is relatively selective for the mu-opioid receptor, although it can bind to other opioid receptors at higher doses. The principal therapeutic action of morphine is analgesia. Like all full opioid agonists, there is no ceiling effect for analgesia with morphine. Clinically, dosage is titrated to provide adequate analgesia and may be limited by adverse reactions, including respiratory and CNS depression. The precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown. However, specific CNS opioid receptors for endogenous compounds with opioid-like activity have been identified throughout the brain and spinal cord and are thought to play a role in the analgesic effects of this drug. 12.2 Pharmacodynamics Effects on the Central Nervous System Morphine sulfate produces respiratory depression by direct action on brain stem respiratory centers. The respiratory depression involves a reduction in the responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to both increases in carbon dioxide tension and electrical stimulation. Morphine causes miosis, even in total darkness. Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origins may produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen due to hypoxia in overdose situations. Effects on the Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle Morphine causes a reduction in motility associated with an increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be increased to the point of spasm, resulting in constipation. Other opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in biliary and pancreatic secretions, spasm of sphincter of Oddi, transient elevations in serum amylase, and opioid‑induced esophageal dysfunction (OIED). Effects of the Cardiovascular System Morphine produces peripheral vasodilation which may result in orthostatic hypotension or syncope. Manifestations of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, sweating, and/or orthostatic hypotension. Effects on the Endocrine System Opioids inhibit the secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), cortisol, and luteinizing hormones (LH) in humans. They also stimulate prolactin, growth hormone (GH) secretion, and pancreatic secretion of insulin and glucagon . Use of opioids for an extended period of time may influence the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, leading to androgen deficiency that may manifest as low libido, impotence, erectile dysfunction, amenorrhea, or infertility. The causal role of opioids in the clinical syndrome of hypogonadism is unknown because the various medical, physical, lifestyle, and psychological stressors that may influence gonadal hormone levels have not been adequately controlled for in studies conducted to date [see Adverse Reactions (6) ] . Effects on the Immune System Opioids have been shown to have a variety of effects on components of the immune system in in vitro and animal models. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown. Overall, the effects of opioids appear to be modestly immunosuppressive. Concentration–Efficacy Relationships The minimum effective analgesic concentration will vary widely among patients, especially among patients who have been previously treated with opioid agonists. The minimum effective analgesic concentration of morphine for any individual patient may increase over time due to an increase in pain, the development of a new pain syndrome, and/or the development of analgesic tolerance [see Dosage and Administration (2.1 , 2.2) ] . Concentration–Adverse Reaction Relationships There is a relationship between increasing morphine sulfate plasma concentration and increasing frequency of dose-related opioid adverse reactions such as nausea, vomiting, CNS effects, and respiratory depression. In opioid-tolerant patients, the situation may be altered by the development of tolerance to opioid-related adverse reactions [see Dosage and Administration (2.1 , 2.2 , 2.4) ]. 12.3 Pharmacokinetics Distribution Morphine has an apparent volume of distribution ranging from 1.0 to 4.7 L/kg after parenteral administration. Protein binding is low, about 36%, and muscle tissue binding is reported as 54%. A blood-brain barrier exists, and when morphine is introduced outside of the CNS, plasma concentrations of morphine remain higher than the corresponding CSF morphine levels. Elimination Morphine has a total plasma clearance which ranges from 0.9 to 1.2 L/kg/h in postoperative patients, but shows considerable inter individual variation. Metabolism The major pathway of clearance is hepatic glucuronidation to morphine-3-glucuronide, which is pharmacologically inactive. Excretion The major excretion path of the conjugate is through the kidneys, with about 10% in the feces. Morphine is also eliminated by the kidneys, 2 to 12% being excreted unchanged in the urine. Terminal half-life is commonly reported to vary from 1.5 to 4.5 hours, although the longer half-lives were obtained when morphine levels were monitored over protracted periods with very sensitive radioimmunoassay methods. The accepted elimination half-life in normal subjects is 1.5 to 2 hours. Specific population Sex While evidence of greater postoperative Morphine Sulfate Injection consumption in men compared to women is present in the literature, clinically significant differences in analgesic outcomes and pharmacokinetic parameters have not been consistently demonstrated. Some studies have shown an increased sensitivity to the adverse effects of Morphine Sulfate Injection, including respiratory depression, in women compared to men. Hepatic Impairment Morphine pharmacokinetics are altered in patients with cirrhosis. Clearance was found to decrease with a corresponding increase in half-life. The M3G and M6G to morphine AUC ratios also decreased in these subjects, indicating diminished metabolic activity. Adequate studies of the pharmacokinetics of morphine in patients with severe hepatic impairment have not been conducted. Renal Impairment Morphine pharmacokinetics are altered in patients with renal failure. The AUC is increased and clearance is decreased and the metabolites, M3G and M6G, may accumulate to much higher plasma levels in patients with renal failure as compared to patients with normal renal function. Adequate studies of the pharmacokinetics of morphine in patients with severe renal impairment have not been conducted.

## pharmacokinetics
12.3 Pharmacokinetics Distribution Morphine has an apparent volume of distribution ranging from 1.0 to 4.7 L/kg after parenteral administration. Protein binding is low, about 36%, and muscle tissue binding is reported as 54%. A blood-brain barrier exists, and when morphine is introduced outside of the CNS, plasma concentrations of morphine remain higher than the corresponding CSF morphine levels. Elimination Morphine has a total plasma clearance which ranges from 0.9 to 1.2 L/kg/h in postoperative patients, but shows considerable inter individual variation. Metabolism The major pathway of clearance is hepatic glucuronidation to morphine-3-glucuronide, which is pharmacologically inactive. Excretion The major excretion path of the conjugate is through the kidneys, with about 10% in the feces. Morphine is also eliminated by the kidneys, 2 to 12% being excreted unchanged in the urine. Terminal half-life is commonly reported to vary from 1.5 to 4.5 hours, although the longer half-lives were obtained when morphine levels were monitored over protracted periods with very sensitive radioimmunoassay methods. The accepted elimination half-life in normal subjects is 1.5 to 2 hours. Specific population Sex While evidence of greater postoperative Morphine Sulfate Injection consumption in men compared to women is present in the literature, clinically significant differences in analgesic outcomes and pharmacokinetic parameters have not been consistently demonstrated. Some studies have shown an increased sensitivity to the adverse effects of Morphine Sulfate Injection, including respiratory depression, in women compared to men. Hepatic Impairment Morphine pharmacokinetics are altered in patients with cirrhosis. Clearance was found to decrease with a corresponding increase in half-life. The M3G and M6G to morphine AUC ratios also decreased in these subjects, indicating diminished metabolic activity. Adequate studies of the pharmacokinetics of morphine in patients with severe hepatic impairment have not been conducted. Renal Impairment Morphine pharmacokinetics are altered in patients with renal failure. The AUC is increased and clearance is decreased and the metabolites, M3G and M6G, may accumulate to much higher plasma levels in patients with renal failure as compared to patients with normal renal function. Adequate studies of the pharmacokinetics of morphine in patients with severe renal impairment have not been conducted.

## warnings_and_cautions
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS • Cardiovascular Instability : High doses are excitatory. Have naloxone injection and resuscitative equipment immediately available. ( 5.5 ) • Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia and Allodynia : Opioid-Induced ‎Hyperalgesia (OIH) occurs when an opioid analgesic paradoxically ‎causes an increase in pain, or an increase in sensitivity to pain. If OIH is suspected, carefully consider ‎appropriately decreasing the dose of the current opioid analgesic or ‎opioid rotation. ‎‎( 5.6 )‎ • Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression in Patients with Chronic Pulmonary Disease or in Elderly, Cachectic, or Debilitated Patients : Monitor closely, particularly during initiation and titration. ( 5.7 ) • Adrenal Insufficiency : If diagnosed, treat with physiologic replacement of corticosteroids, and wean patient off of the opioid. ( 5.9 ) • Severe Hypotension : Monitor during dosage initiation and titration. Avoid use of Morphine Sulfate Injection in patients with circulatory shock. ( 5.10 ) • Risks of Use in Patients with Increased Intracranial Pressure, Brain Tumors, Head Injury, or Impaired Consciousness : Monitor for sedation and respiratory depression. Avoid use of Morphine Sulfate Injection in patients with impaired consciousness or coma. ( 5.11 ) 5.1 Addiction, Abuse, and Misuse Morphine Sulfate Injection contains morphine, a Schedule II controlled substance. As an opioid, Morphine Sulfate Injection exposes users to the risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse [see Drug Abuse and Dependence (9) ]. Although the risk of addiction in any individual is unknown, it can occur in patients appropriately prescribed Morphine Sulfate Injection. Addiction can occur at recommended dosages and if the drug is misused or abused. The risk of opioid-related overdose or overdose-related death is increased with higher opioid doses, and this risk persists over the course of therapy. In postmarketing studies, addiction, abuse, misuse, and fatal and non-fatal opioid overdose were observed in patients with long-term opioid use [see Adverse Reactions (6) ] . Assess each patient's risk for opioid addiction, abuse, or misuse prior to prescribing Morphine Sulfate Injection, and monitor all patients receiving morphine sulfate for the development of these behaviors and conditions. Risks are increased in patients with a personal or family history of substance abuse (including drug or alcohol abuse or addiction) or mental illness (e.g., major depression). The potential for these risks should not, however, prevent the proper management of pain in any given patient. Patients at increased risk may be prescribed opioids such as Morphine Sulfate Injection but use in such patients necessitates intensive counseling about the risks and proper use of Morphine Sulfate Injection along with intensive monitoring for signs of addiction, abuse, and misuse. Opioids are sought for nonmedical use and are subject to diversion from ‎legitimate prescribed use. Consider these risks when prescribing or dispensing Morphine Sulfate Injection. Strategies to reduce these risks include prescribing the drug in the smallest appropriate quantity. Contact local state professional licensing board or state-controlled substances authority for information on how to prevent and detect abuse or diversion of this product. 5.2 Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression has been reported with the use of opioids, even when used as recommended. Respiratory depression, if not immediately recognized and treated, may lead to respiratory arrest and death. Management of respiratory depression may include close observation, supportive measures, and use of opioid overdose reversal agents (e.g., naloxone, nalmefene) , depending on the patient's clinical status [see Overdosage (10) ] . Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) retention from opioid-induced respiratory depression can exacerbate the sedating effects of opioids. While serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression can occur at any time during the use of Morphine Sulfate Injection, the risk is greatest during the initiation of therapy or following a dosage increase. Because of a delay in the maximum CNS effect with intravenously administered Morphine Sulfate Injection (30 min), rapid administration may result in overdosing. The respiratory depression may be severe and could require intervention [see Overdosage (10) ] . To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of Morphine Sulfate Injection are essential [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) ] . Overestimating the Morphine Sulfate Injection dosage when converting patients from another opioid product can result in a fatal overdose with the first dose. Opioids can cause sleep-related breathing disorders including central sleep apnea (CSA) and sleep-related hypoxemia. Opioid use increases the risk of CSA in a dose-dependent fashion. In patients who present with CSA, consider decreasing the opioid dosage using best practices for opioid taper [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) ] . 5.3 Risks from Concomitant Use with Benzodiazepines or Other Central Nervous System Depressants Profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death may result from the concomitant use of Morphine Sulfate Injection with benzodiazepines and/or other CNS depressants, including alcohol (e.g., non-benzodiazepine sedatives/hypnotics, anxiolytics, tranquilizers, muscle relaxants, general anesthetics, antipsychotics, gabapentinoids [gabapentin or pregabalin], and other opioids). Because of these risks, reserve concomitant prescribing of these drugs for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are inadequate. Observational studies have demonstrated that concomitant use of opioid analgesics and benzodiazepines increases the risk of drug-related mortality compared to use of opioid analgesics alone. Because of similar pharmacological properties, it is reasonable to expect similar risk with the concomitant use of other CNS depressant drugs with opioid analgesics [see Drug Interactions (7) ] . If the decision is made to prescribe a benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant concomitantly with an opioid analgesic, prescribe the lowest effective dosages and minimum durations of concomitant use. In patients already receiving an opioid analgesic, prescribe a lower initial dose of the benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant than indicated in the absence of an opioid, and titrate based on clinical response. If an opioid analgesic is initiated in a patient already taking a benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant, prescribe a lower initial dose of the opioid analgesic, and titrate based on clinical response. Monitor patients closely for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and sedation. Advise both patients and caregivers about the risks of respiratory depression and sedation when Morphine Sulfate Injection is used with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants (including alcohol and illicit drugs). Advise patients not to drive or operate heavy machinery until the effects of concomitant use of the benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant have been determined. Screen patients for risk of substance use disorders, including opioid abuse and misuse, and warn them of the risk for overdose and death associated with the use of additional CNS depressants including alcohol and illicit drugs [see Drug Interactions (7) ] . 5.4 Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome Use of Morphine Sulfate Injection for an extended period of time during pregnancy can result in withdrawal in the neonate. Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, unlike opioid withdrawal syndrome in adults, may be life-threatening if not recognized and treated, and requires management according to protocols developed by neonatology experts. Observe newborns for signs of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome and manage accordingly. Advise pregnant women using opioids for an extended period of time of the risk of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome and ensure that management by neonatology experts will be available at delivery [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1) ] . 5.5 Cardiovascular Instability While low doses of intravenously administered morphine have little effect on cardiovascular stability, high doses are excitatory, resulting from sympathetic hyperactivity and increase in circulatory catecholamines. Have naloxone injection and resuscitative equipment immediately available for use in case of life-threatening or intolerable side effects and whenever morphine therapy is being initiated. 5.6 Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia and Allodynia Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia (OIH) occurs when an opioid analgesic ‎paradoxically causes an increase in ‎pain, or an increase in sensitivity to pain. ‎This condition differs from tolerance, which is the need for ‎increasing doses of ‎opioids to maintain a defined effect [see Drug Abuse and Dependence (9.3) ] . Symptoms of OIH ‎‎include (but may not be limited to) increased levels of pain upon opioid dosage ‎increase, decreased ‎levels of pain upon opioid dosage decrease, or pain from ‎ordinarily non-painful stimuli (allodynia). ‎These symptoms may suggest OIH only ‎if there is no evidence of underlying disease progression, opioid ‎tolerance, ‎opioid withdrawal, or addictive behavior.‎ Cases of OIH have been reported, both with short-term and longer-term use of ‎opioid analgesics. Though the mechanism of OIH is not fully understood, ‎multiple biochemical pathways have been implicated. Medical literature suggests ‎a strong biologic plausibility between opioid analgesics and OIH and allodynia. If ‎a patient is suspected to be experiencing OIH, carefully consider appropriately ‎decreasing the dose of the current opioid analgesic or opioid rotation (safely ‎switching the patient to a different opioid moiety) [see Dosage and ‎Administration (2.4) , Warnings and Precautions (5.14) ] .‎ 5.7 Life-Threatening Respiratory Depression in Patients with Chronic Pulmonary Disease or in Elderly, Cachectic, or Debilitated Patients The use of Morphine Sulfate Injection in patients with acute or severe bronchial asthma in an unmonitored setting or in the absence of resuscitative equipment is contraindicated. Patients with Chronic Pulmonary Disease: Morphine Sulfate Injection-treated patients with significant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or cor pulmonale, and those with a substantially decreased respiratory reserve, hypoxia, hypercapnia, or pre-existing respiratory depression are at increased risk of decreased respiratory drive including apnea, even at recommended dosages of Morphine Sulfate Injection [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] . Elderly, Cachectic, or Debilitated Patients: Life-threatening respiratory depression is more likely to occur in elderly, cachectic, or debilitated patients because they may have altered pharmacokinetics or altered clearance compared to younger, healthier patients [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] . Monitor such patients closely, particularly when initiating and titrating Morphine Sulfate Injection and when Morphine Sulfate Injection is given concomitantly with other drugs that depress respiration [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] . Alternatively, consider the use of non-opioid analgesics in these patients. 5.8 Interaction with Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) may potentiate the effects of morphine, including respiratory depression, coma, and confusion. Morphine Sulfate Injection should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. 5.9 Adrenal Insufficiency Cases of adrenal insufficiency have been reported with opioid use, more often following greater than one month of use. Presentation of adrenal insufficiency may include non-specific symptoms and signs including nausea, vomiting, anorexia, fatigue, weakness, dizziness, and low blood pressure. If adrenal insufficiency is suspected, confirm the diagnosis with diagnostic testing as soon as possible. If adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed, treat with physiologic replacement doses of corticosteroids. Wean the patient off of the opioid to allow adrenal function to recover and continue corticosteroid treatment until adrenal function recovers. Other opioids may be tried as some cases reported use of a different opioid without recurrence of adrenal insufficiency. The information available does not identify any particular opioids as being more likely to be associated with adrenal insufficiency. 5.10 Severe Hypotension Morphine Sulfate Injection may cause severe hypotension including orthostatic hypotension and syncope in ambulatory patients. There is increased risk in patients whose ability to maintain blood pressure has already been compromised by a reduced blood volume or concurrent administration of certain CNS depressant drugs (e.g., phenothiazines or general anesthetics) [see Drug Interactions (7) ] . Monitor these patients for signs of hypotension after initiating or titrating the dosage of Morphine Sulfate Injection. In patients with circulatory shock, Morphine Sulfate Injection may cause vasodilation that can further reduce cardiac output and blood pressure. Avoid the use of Morphine Sulfate Injection in patients with circulatory shock. 5.11 Risks of Use in Patients with Increased Intracranial Pressure, Brain Tumors, Head Injury, or Impaired Consciousness In patients who may be susceptible to the intracranial effects of CO 2 retention (e.g., those with evidence of increased intracranial pressure or brain tumors), Morphine Sulfate Injection may reduce respiratory drive, and the resultant CO 2 retention can further increase intracranial pressure. Monitor such patients for worsening of signs of increasing intracranial pressure.‎ Monitor patients for signs of sedation and respiratory depression, particularly when initiating therapy with Morphine Sulfate Injection. Opioids may also obscure the clinical course in a patient with a head injury. Avoid the use of Morphine Sulfate Injection in patients with impaired consciousness or coma. 5.12 Risks of Gastrointestinal Complications Morphine Sulfate Injection is contraindicated in patients with known or suspected gastrointestinal obstruction, including paralytic ileus. The morphine in Morphine Sulfate Injection may cause spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. Opioids may cause increases in serum amylase. Monitor patients with biliary tract disease, including acute pancreatitis, for worsening symptoms. Cases of opioid-induced esophageal dysfunction (OIED) have been reported in patients taking opioids. The risk of OIED may increase as the dose and/or duration of opioids increases. Regularly evaluate patients for signs and symptoms of OIED (e.g., dysphagia, regurgitation, non-cardiac chest pain) and, if necessary, adjust opioid therapy as clinically appropriate [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2) ] . 5.13 Increased Risk of Seizures in Patients with Seizure Disorders The morphine in Morphine Sulfate Injection may increase the frequency of seizures in patients with seizure disorders, and may increase the risk of seizures occurring in other clinical settings associated with seizures. Monitor patients with a history of seizure disorders for worsened seizure control during Morphine Sulfate Injection therapy. Excitation of the central nervous system, resulting in convulsions, may accompany high doses of morphine given intravenously. 5.14 Withdrawal Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist (e.g, pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) or partial agonist (e.g., buprenorphine) analgesics in patients who are receiving a full opioid agonist analgesic, including Morphine Sulfate Injection. In these patients, mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect and/or precipitate withdrawal symptoms [see Drug Interactions (7) ] . When discontinuing Morphine Sulfate Injection in a physically-dependent patient, gradually taper the dosage [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) ]. Do not rapidly reduce or abruptly discontinue Morphine Sulfate Injection in these patients [see Drug Abuse and Dependence (9.3) ]. 5.15 Risks of Driving and Operating Machinery Morphine Sulfate Injection may impair the mental or physical abilities needed to perform potentially hazardous activities such as driving a car or operating machinery. Warn patients not to drive or operate dangerous machinery unless they are tolerant to the effects of Morphine Sulfate Injection and know how they will react to the medication.

## contraindications
4 CONTRAINDICATIONS Morphine Sulfate Injection is contraindicated in patients with: • Significant respiratory depression [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] • Acute or severe bronchial asthma in an unmonitored setting or in the absence of resuscitative equipment [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) ] • Concurrent use of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) or use of MAOIs within the last 14 days [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8) ] • Known or suspected gastrointestinal obstruction, including paralytic ileus [see Warnings and Precautions (5.12) ] • Hypersensitivity to morphine (e.g., anaphylaxis) [see Adverse Reactions (6) ] • Significant respiratory depression. ( 4 ) • Acute or severe bronchial asthma in an unmonitored setting or in absence of resuscitative equipment. ( 4 ) • Concurrent use of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) or use of MAOIs within the last 14 days. ( 4 ) • Known or suspected gastrointestinal obstruction, including paralytic ileus. ( 4 ) • Hypersensitivity to morphine. ( 4 )

## description
11 DESCRIPTION Morphine, an opioid agonist, is isolated in the form of sulfate salt and pentahydrate, which has the chemical name as 7,8-Didehydro-4,5-epoxy-17-methyl-(5α,6α)-morphinan-3,6-diol sulfate (2:1) (salt), pentahydrate. It has a molecular weight of 758.83 and a chemical formula of (C 17 H 19 NO 3 ) 2 ∙ H 2 SO 4 ∙ 5H 2 O, with the following structural formula: Morphine sulfate USP is an odorless, white crystalline powder with a bitter taste. When exposed to air, it gradually loses water of hydration, and darkens on prolonged exposure to light. It has a solubility of 1 in 21 parts of water and 1 in 1000 parts of alcohol, but is practically insoluble in chloroform or ether. The octanol:water partition coefficient of morphine is 1.42 at physiologic pH and the pKa is 7.9 for the tertiary nitrogen (the majority is ionized at pH 7.4). Morphine Sulfate Injection, USP is a sterile, nonpyrogenic solution of morphine sulfate, free of antioxidants and preservatives, to be administered by the intravenous route. It is available in 1,000 mg/20 mL (50 mg/mL) and 2,500 mg/50 mL (50 mg/mL) single-dose flip top vials for the preparation of large volume parenteral solutions. Each milliliter of sterile solution contains 50 mg Morphine Sulfate, USP (Pentahydrate) and the following inactive ingredients: 0.2 mg edetate disodium, 0.8 mg citric acid, sodium chloride to adjust isotonicity, and water for injection. Hydrochloric acid and/or sodium hydroxide may be added to adjust pH. The pH range is 2.5 to 4.0. Chemical Structure

## package_label_principal_display_panel
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Vial Label 20 mL Single-Dose Vial NDC 0409-1896-20 Rx only Morphine Sulfate CII Injection, USP 1,000 mg/20 mL (50 mg/mL) FOR INTRAVENOUS USE ONLY AFTER DILUTION Not for epidural or intrathecal use CAUTION: NOT FOR DIRECT INJECTION PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Vial Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Vial Carton 20 mL Single-Dose Vial NDC 0409-1896-20 Rx only CII Morphine Sulfate Injection, USP 1,000 mg/20 mL (50 mg/mL) FOR INTRAVENOUS USE ONLY AFTER DILUTION Not for epidural or intrathecal use CAUTION: NOT FOR DIRECT INJECTION Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 20 mL Vial Carton
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Label 50 mL Single-Dose Vial Rx only Morphine Sulfate Injection, USP CII 2,500 mg/50 mL (50 mg/mL) FOR INTRAVENOUS USE ONLY AFTER DILUTION Not for epidural or intrathecal use CAUTION: NOT FOR DIRECT INJECTION Dist. by Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL 60045 USA Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Label
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Carton 50 mL Single-Dose Vial NDC 0409-2022-01 Rx only CII Morphine Sulfate Injection, USP 2,500 mg/50 mL (50 mg/mL) FOR INTRAVENOUS USE ONLY AFTER DILUTION Not for epidural or intrathecal use CAUTION: NOT FOR DIRECT INJECTION Hospira PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - 50 mL Vial Carton