URL: https://hub.tghn.org/terms/
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

Terms & Conditions • The Global Health Network

We use cookies to track visits to our website, and we don't store any of your personal details.
Find out more

Dismiss

Terms & Conditions

Please read these terms and conditions carefully before using this site.

About these terms

This page (together with the documents referred to in it) sets out the terms on which you may make use of this website
https://tghn.org

and any subdomains (the “
site
”), whether as a guest or a registered user. Use of the site includes accessing, browsing or registering to use the site.

Please read these Terms of Use carefully before you start to use the site: by using the site, you confirm that you accept these terms of use and that you agree to comply with them.

If you do not agree to these terms of use, you must not use the site.

Other applicable terms

These terms of use refer to the following additional terms, which also apply to your use of the site:

The
Privacy Policy
, which sets out the terms on which any personal data collected from you will be processed. By using the site, you consent to such processing and you warrant that all data provided by you is accurate.

The
Acceptable Use Policy
, which sets out the permitted uses and prohibited uses of the site. When using the site, you must comply with this Acceptable Use Policy.

The
Terms of Submission
, which set out the terms on which you may submit content to the site. When submitting any content to the site, you must comply with the Terms of Submission.

The
Cookie Statement
, which sets out information about the use of cookies on the site.

Please note that there may be other additional terms published elsewhere on the site in relation to specific services or functionalities of the site.

Information about us

The Global Health Network (“
TGHN
”) is a collaborative project involving research organisations from all over the world.

The site has been established to achieve TGHN’s aim to facilitate collaboration and resource sharing for global health. The site operates as a network, hosting communities of practice focusing on specific therapeutic areas and research issues.

The University of Oxford (the “
University
”) is currently acting as the coordinator for the site infrastructure, but each community of practice is coordinated by a TGHN collaborator. A list of the current TGHN collaborators and the communities of practice they are coordinating is available
here
.

Any subsequent reference to the University in these terms shall include the TGHN collaborators from time to time involved in the project. However, unless expressly provided otherwise, the liability of TGHN collaborators in connection with TGHN or the site shall be several and extend only to any loss or damage arising out of their own acts and omissions.

Accessing the site

The University does not guarantee that the site, or any content on it, will always be available or be uninterrupted. Access to the site is permitted on a temporary basis. The University may suspend, withdraw, discontinue or change all or any part of the site without notice. The University will not be liable to you if for any reason the site is unavailable at any time or for any period.

You are responsible for making all arrangements necessary for you to have access to the site.

Registration and passwords

From time to time, the University may restrict access to some parts of the site, or the entire site, to users who have registered with it.

If you choose, or you are provided with, a user identification code, password or any other piece of information as part of the site’s security procedures, you must treat such information as confidential. You must not disclose it to any third party.

The University has the right to disable any user identification code or password, whether chosen by you or allocated by the University, at any time, if in its reasonable opinion you have failed to comply with any of the provisions of these Terms of Use.

If you know or suspect that anyone other than you knows your user identification code or password, you must promptly notify the University at
info@theglobalhealthnetwork.org
.

Changes to the site

The University may update the site from time to time, and may change the content at any time. However, please note that any of the content on the site may be out of date at any given time, and the University is under no obligation to update it.

The University does not guarantee that the site, or any content on it, will be free from errors or omissions.

No reliance on information

Although the University endeavours to use reasonable care in generating, compiling, publishing and providing content on the site, content is often provided by third parties. All content on the site is therefore provided for general information only and must not be relied on alone. The use and interpretation of the content requires specialist skill and knowledge. In order to use the content, you must have the required skill and knowledge, and exercise appropriate judgment, or obtain such specialist advice before taking, or refraining from, any action on the basis of the content on the site.

The University disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on any content by you or any third party that may be informed of such content.

Although the University makes reasonable efforts to update the information on the site, it makes no representations, warranties or guarantees, whether express or implied, that the content on the site is accurate, complete or up-to-date.

Intellectual property rights

The University is the owner or the licensee of all intellectual property rights in the site, and in the content published on it. Those works are protected by intellectual property laws and treaties around the world. All such rights are reserved.

You must not use any content in such a way as to suggest any form of association, approval or endorsement on the University’s part where none exists.

You must not use any trade marks, logos, illustrations, photographs, video or audio sequences or any graphics separately from any accompanying, unmodified text.

The status of the University (and that of any identified contributors) as the authors of the content on the site must always be acknowledged.

You must not use any part of the content on the site for commercial purposes without obtaining a licence to do so from the University or its licensors.

If you use any content in breach of these Terms of Use, your right to use the site will cease immediately and you must, at the University’s option, return or destroy any copies of the content you have made.

University’s liability

Nothing in these terms of use excludes or limits the University’s liability for death or personal injury arising from its negligence, or its fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or any other liability that cannot be excluded or limited by the law of England and Wales.

To the extent permitted by law, the University excludes all conditions, warranties, representations or other terms which may apply to the site or any content on it, whether express or implied.

The University will not be liable to any user for any loss or damage, whether in contract, tort (including negligence), breach of statutory duty, or otherwise, even if foreseeable, arising under or in connection with:

use of, or inability to use, the site;

use of or reliance on any content displayed on the site;

loss of profits, sales, business, or revenue;

business interruption;

loss of anticipated savings;

loss of business opportunity, goodwill or reputation; or

any indirect or consequential loss or damage.

Please note that the site is only provided for education and other non-commercial purposes. You agree not to use the site for any commercial or business purposes.

The University will not be liable for any loss or damage caused by a virus, distributed denial-of-service attack, or other technologically harmful material that may infect your computer equipment, computer programs, data or other proprietary material due to your use of the site or to your downloading of any content on it, or on any website linked to it.

The University assumes no responsibility for the content of websites linked on the site. Such links should not be interpreted as endorsement by the University of those linked websites. The University will not be liable for any loss or damage that may arise from your use of them.

You undertake to make no claim in connection with the site against any employee, student, agent or appointee of the University (apart from claims based on fraud or deliberate default). This undertaking is intended to give protection to individuals: it does not prejudice any right which you might have to claim against the University. The benefit conferred by this sub-clause is intended to be enforceable by the persons referred to in it.

If notwithstanding the provisions of these Terms of Use, the University is held to be liable to you for any reason, the University’s aggregate liability to you shall not exceed one hundred pounds sterling (£100).

Uploading content to the site

Whenever you make use of a feature that allows you to upload content to the site, or to make contact with other users of the site, you must comply with the content standards set out in the
Acceptable Use Policy
and the
Terms of Submission
.

You warrant that any such contribution does comply with the
Acceptable Use Policy
and the
Terms of Submission
, and you indemnify the University for any breach of this warranty.

Any content you upload to the site will be treated in accordance with the
Terms of Submission
.

The University will be entitled to disclose your identity to any third party who is claiming that any content posted or uploaded by you to the site constitutes a violation of their intellectual property rights, or of their right to privacy.

The University will not be responsible, or liable to any third party, for the content or accuracy of any content posted by you or any other user of the site.

The University will have the right to remove any posting you make on the site if, in its opinion, your post does not comply with the content standards set out in our
Acceptable Use Policy
or any provision of the
Terms of Submission
.

The views expressed by other users on the site do not represent the University’s views or values.

Viruses

The University does not guarantee that the site will be secure or free from bugs or viruses.

You are responsible for configuring your information technology, computer programmes and platform in order to access the site. You should use your own virus protection software.

You must not misuse the site by knowingly introducing viruses, trojans, worms, logic bombs or other material which is malicious or technologically harmful. You must not attempt to gain unauthorised access to the site, the server on which the site is stored or any server, computer or database connected to the site. You must not attack the site via a denial-of-service attack or a distributed denial-of service attack. By breaching this provision, you would commit a criminal offence under the Computer Misuse Act 1990. We will report any such breach to the relevant law enforcement authorities and we will co-operate with those authorities by disclosing your identity to them. In the event of such a breach, your right to use the site will cease immediately.

Linking to the site

You may link to the home page, provided you do so in a way that is fair and legal and does not damage the University’s reputation or take advantage of it.

You must not establish a link in such a way as to suggest any form of association, approval or endorsement on the University’s part where none exists.

You must not establish a link to the site in any website that is not owned by you.

The site must not be framed on any other site, nor may you create a link to any part of the site other than the home page.

The University reserves the right to withdraw linking permission without notice.

The website in which you are linking must comply in all respects with the content standards set out in our
Acceptable Use Policy
.

If you wish to make any use of content on the site other than that set out above, please contact
info@theglobalhealthnetwork.org
.

Third party links and resources

Where the site contains links to other sites and resources provided by third parties, these links are provided for your information only.

We have no control over the contents of those sites or resources.

Migration

Please note that the site infrastructure is only currently coordinated by the University of Oxford. TGHN is an international collaborative project, and responsibility for coordinating the infrastructure of the site may be transferred to another TGHN collaborator from time to time.

Changes to these Terms of Use

The University may revise these Terms of Use at any time by amending this page.

Please check this page from time to time to take notice of any changes the University may make, as they are binding on you.

Applicable Law

These Terms of Use and any dispute or claim arising out of or in connection with them or their subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims) shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the law of England and Wales. The courts of England and Wales will have exclusive jurisdiction over any claim.

Contact us

To contact us, please email
info@theglobalhealthnetwork.org
.

Thank you for visiting The Global Health Network.