URL: https://www.cdc.gov/act-early/milestones/15-months.html
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

Milestones by 15 Months | Learn the Signs. Act Early. | CDC

Skip directly to site content

Skip directly to search

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Milestones by 15 Months

For Everyone

May 15, 2026

Español

What to know

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by 15 months of age.

See important information to share with your doctor.

Find tips and activities you can do for your 15-month-old.

Ways to monitor milestones

How your child plays, learns, speaks, acts, and moves offers important clues about your child's development. Developmental milestones are things most children (75% or more) can do by a certain age.

Milestone checklists

Check the milestones your child has reached by 15 months by completing a checklist, available below and in three additional formats:

CDC's free
Milestone Tracker
mobile app
, for iOS and Android devices

Web-based Digital Online Checklist

Printable checklist

Keep in mind

Learn the Signs. Act Early
. materials are not a substitute for standardized, validated
developmental screening tools
.

What most children do by 15 months

Click the links below to view a photo or video of each milestone.

Social/Emotional Milestones

Copies other children while playing, like taking toys out of a container when another child does

Shows you an object she likes

Claps when excited

Hugs stuffed doll or other toy

Shows you affection (hugs, cuddles, or kisses you)

Language/Communication Milestones

Tries to say one or two words besides “mama” or “dada,” like “ba” for ball or “da” for dog

Looks at a familiar object when you name it

Follows directions given with both a gesture and words. For example, he gives you a toy when you hold out your hand and say, “Give me the toy.”

Points to ask for something or to get help

Cognitive Milestones (learning, thinking, problem-solving)

Tries to use things the right way, like a phone, cup, or book

Stacks at least two small objects, like blocks

Movement/Physical Development Milestones

Takes a few steps on his own

Uses fingers to feed herself some food

See Also

More about physical development

Share with your child’s doctor

Things to share and consider

What are some things you and your child do together?

What are some things your child likes to do?

Is there anything your child does or does not do that concerns you?

Has your child lost any skills he/she once had?

Does your child have any special healthcare needs or was he/she born prematurely?

You know your child best.
Don't wait. If your child is not meeting one or more milestones, has lost skills he or she once had, or you have other concerns, act early. Talk with your child's doctor, share your concerns, and ask about developmental screening.

If you or the doctor are still concerned

Ask for a referral to a specialist who can evaluate your child more; and
Call your state or territory's early intervention program to find out if your child can get services to help. Learn more and find the number at
cdc.gov/FindEI
.

Keep Reading

Concerned About Your Child's Development?

Tips and activities

What You Can Do for Your 15-month-old

As your child's first teacher, you can help his or her development.

As your child's first teacher, you can help his or her learning and brain development. Try these simple tips and activities in a safe way. Talk with your child's doctor and teachers if you have questions or for more ideas on how to help your child's development.

Help your child learn to speak. A child's early words are not complete. Repeat and add to what he says. He may say "ba" for ball and you can say "Ball, yes, that's a ball."

Tell your child the names of objects when he points to them and wait a few seconds to see if he makes any sounds before handing it to him. If he does make a sound, acknowledge him, and repeat the name of the object. "Yes! Cup."

Find ways to let your child help with everyday activities. Let her get her shoes to go outside, put the snacks in the bag for the park, or put the socks in the basket.

More Parenting Tips and Activities

Have steady routines for sleeping and feeding. Create a calm, quiet bedtime for your child. Put on his pajamas, brush his teeth, and read 1 or 2 books to him. Children between 1 and 2 years of age need 11 to 14 hours of sleep a day (including naps). Consistent sleep times make it easier!
Show your child different things, such as a hat. Ask him, "What do you do with a hat? You put it on your head." Put it on your head and then give it to him to see if he copies you. Do this with other objects, such as a book or a cup.
Sing songs with gestures, such as "Wheels on the Bus." See if your child tries to do some of the actions.
Say what you think your child is feeling (for example, sad, mad, frustrated, happy). Use your words, facial expressions, and voice to show what you think she is feeling. For example, say "You are frustrated because we can't go outside, but you can't hit. Let's go look for an indoor game."
Expect tantrums. They are normal at this age and are more likely if your child is tired or hungry. Tantrums should become shorter and happen less as he gets older. You can try a distraction, but it is ok to let him have the tantrum without doing anything. Give him some time to calm down and move on.
Teach your child "wanted behaviors." Show her what to do and use positive words or give her hugs and kisses when she does it. For example, if she pulls your pet's tail, teach her how to pet gently. Give her a hug when she does it.
Limit screen time (TV, tablets, phones, etc.) to video calling with loved ones. Screen time is not recommended for children younger than 2 years of age. Children learn by talking, playing, and interacting with others.
Encourage your child to play with blocks. You can stack the blocks and she can knock them down.
Let your child use a cup without a lid for drinking and practice eating with a spoon. Learning to eat and drink is messy but fun!
Give your child water, breast milk, or plain milk. You don't need to give your child juice, but if you do, give 4 ounces or less a day of 100% fruit juice. Do not give your child other sugary beverages, such as fruit drinks, soda, sports drinks, or flavored milks.
Give your baby safe places to explore. Baby-proof your home. For example, move sharp or breakable things out of reach. Lock away medicines, chemicals, and cleaning products. Save the Poison Help Line number, 800-222-1222, in all phones.
Continue to talk, read, sing, and tell your child the names of things throughout the day. She will try to say and learn many new words, which can help her read later on.
Make a "book" with pictures of people and pets in your child's life. Name them as you look through the book together. Include a picture of your child.
Sing or play children's songs and songs your family enjoys. Dance with your child.
Read a new book after a favorite one to explore and try new books. Children like to do favorite things again and again. You can use the things they like to do to introduce new things.
Play simple games, such as hide and seek. Let your child watch you hide behind a chair and then wait for her to come "find" you.
Make up a simple "cleanup song" and sing it while you teach your child to help "clean up." Have him help put toys in a basket or hand you things to put away.
You can teach simple gestures and sign language (for example, pointing and waving) to help your child "talk" to you and show you what she wants.
"Pretend talk" to your child with a stuffed animal. See if your child tries to copy you or if he uses another stuffed animal to "talk" with the one you are holding.
Blow bubbles and let your child pop them. Say things as she pops them, such as "Pop, pop."

On This Page

Ways to monitor milestones

What most children do by 15 months

Share with your child’s doctor

Tips and activities

May 15, 2026

Sources and Page Info

Print

Share

Facebook

LinkedIn

Twitter

Syndicate

Content Source

National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities (NCBDDD)

About This Page

Published:
September 4, 2025

Updated:
May 16, 2026
This page was last updated on this date. Updates may include minor edits, image changes, or other modifications to page content.

Reviewed:
May 16, 2026
The information on this page was last reviewed by subject matter experts to ensure accuracy.

Sources
Special acknowledgments to the subject matter experts and others who contributed to the review of data and selection of developmental milestones, especially Paul H. Lipkin, MD, Michelle M. Macias, MD, Julie F. Pajek, PhD, Judith S. Shaw, EdD, MPH, RN, Karnesha Slaughter, MPH, Jane K. Squires,
PhD, Toni M. Whitaker, MD, Lisa D. Wiggins, PhD, and Jennifer M. Zubler, MD.

Sincere gratitude to Natalia Benza, MD and José O. Rodríguez, MD, MBA for their thoughtful review of the Spanish-language translation of these milestones.

Learn the Signs. Act Early.

From birth to 5 years, your child should reach development milestones. Track your child’s development and act early if you have a concern.

View All

For Everyone

About

Early Intervention

CDC's Developmental Milestones

Milestone Tracker
App

All Resources

Resources for Families

Resources for Early Childhood Educators

Other Programs for Children

View all

Health Care Providers

Resources for Healthcare Providers

Sign up for Email Updates

Copies other children while playing, like taking toys out of a container when another child does

Close

Shows you an object she likes

Close

Claps when excited

Close

Hugs stuffed doll or other toy

Close

Shows you affection (hugs, cuddles, or kisses you)

Close

Tries to say one or two words besides “mama” or “dada,” like “ba” for ball or “da” for dog

Close

Looks at a familiar object when you name it

Close

Follows directions given with both a gesture and words. For example, he gives you a toy when you hold out your hand and say, “Give me the toy.”

Close

Points to ask for something or to get help

Close

Tries to use things the right way, like a phone, cup, or book

Close

Stacks at least two small objects, like blocks

Close

Takes a few steps on his own

Close

Uses fingers to feed herself some food

Close