URL: https://www.cdc.gov/act-early/milestones/1-year.html
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

Milestones by 1 Year | Learn the Signs. Act Early. | CDC

Skip directly to site content

Skip directly to search

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Milestones by 1 Year

For Everyone

May 15, 2026

Español

What to know

Learn about the developmental milestones that most babies do by 1 year of age.

See important information to share with your doctor.

Find tips and activities you can do for your 1-year-old.

Ways to monitor milestones

How your child plays, learns, speaks, acts, and moves offers important clues about your child's development. Developmental milestones are things most children (75% or more) can do by a certain age.

Milestone checklists

Check the milestones your baby has reached by 1 year by completing a checklist, available below and in three additional formats:

CDC's free
Milestone Tracker
mobile app
, for iOS and Android devices

Web-based Digital Online Checklist

Printable checklist

Keep in mind

Learn the Signs. Act Early
. materials are not a substitute for standardized, validated
developmental screening tools
.

What most babies do by 1 year

Click the links below to view a photo or video of each milestone.

Social/Emotional Milestones

Plays games with you, like pat-a-cake

Language/Communication Milestones

Waves “bye-bye”

Calls a parent “mama” or “dada” or another special name

Understands “no” (pauses briefly or stops when you say it)

Cognitive Milestones (learning, thinking, problem-solving)

Puts something in a container, like a block in a cup

Looks for things he sees you hide, like a toy under a blanket

Movement/Physical Development Milestones

Pulls up to stand

Walks, holding on to furniture

Drinks from a cup without a lid, as you hold it

Picks things up between thumb and pointer finger, like small bits of food

See Also

More about physical development

Share with your child’s doctor

Things to share and consider

What are some things you and your baby do together?

What are some things your baby likes to do?

Is there anything your baby does or does not do that concerns you?

Has your baby lost any skills he/she once had?

Does your baby have any special healthcare needs or was he/she born prematurely?

You know your child best.
Don't wait. If your child is not meeting one or more milestones, has lost skills he or she once had, or you have other concerns, act early. Talk with your child's doctor, share your concerns, and ask about developmental screening.

If you or the doctor are still concerned

Ask for a referral to a specialist who can evaluate your child more; and
Call your state or territory's early intervention program to find out if your child can get services to help. Learn more and find the number at
cdc.gov/FindEI
.

Keep Reading

Concerned About Your Child's Development?

Tips and activities

What You Can Do for Your 1-year-old

As your baby's first teacher, you can help his or her development.

As your baby's first teacher, you can help his or her learning and brain development. Try these simple tips and activities in a safe way. Talk with your baby's doctor and teachers if you have questions or for more ideas on how to help your baby's development.

Teach your baby "wanted behaviors." Show her what to do and use positive words or give her hugs and kisses when she does it. For example, if she pulls your pet's tail, teach her how to pet gently and give her a hug when she does it.

Talk or sing to your baby about what you're doing. For example, "Mommy is washing your hands" or sing, "This is the way we wash our hands."

Build on what your baby tries to say. If he says "ta," say "Yes, a truck," or if he says "truck," say "Yes, that's a big, blue truck."

More Parenting Tips and Activities

Redirect your baby quickly and consistently by giving her a toy or moving her if she is getting into things you don't want her to get into. Save "no" for behaviors that are dangerous. When you say "no," say it firmly. Do not spank, yell, or give her long explanations.
Give your baby safe places to explore. Baby-proof your home. For example, move sharp or breakable things out of reach. Lock away medicines, chemicals, and cleaning products. Save the Poison Help Line number, 800-222-1222, in all phones.
Respond with words when your baby points. Babies point to ask for things. For example, say "You want the cup? Here is the cup. It's your cup." If he tries to say "cup," celebrate his attempt.
Point to interesting things you see, such as a truck, bus, or animals. This will help your baby pay attention to what others are "showing" him through pointing.
Limit screen time (TV, tablets, phones, etc.) to video calling with loved ones. Screen time is not recommended for children younger than 2 years of age. Babies learn by talking, playing, and interacting with others.
Give your baby water, breast milk, or plain milk. You don't need to give your baby juice, but if you do, give 4 ounces or less a day of 100% fruit juice. Do not give your baby other sugary beverages, such as fruit drinks, soda, sports drinks, or flavored milks.
Help your baby get used to foods with different tastes and textures. Foods can be smooth, mashed, or finely chopped. Your baby might not like every food on the first try. Give your baby a chance to try foods again and again.
Give your baby time to get to know a new caregiver. Bring a favorite toy, stuffed animal, or blanket to help comfort your baby.
Give your baby pots and pans or a small musical instrument like a drum or cymbals. Encourage your baby to make noise.
Find out about foods that are choking risks. Let your baby practice feeding himself safe foods with his fingers and using a cup with a small amount of water. Sit next to your baby and enjoy mealtime together. Expect spills. Learning is messy and fun!
Make sure your baby gets enough sleep: 4- to 12-month-olds need 12 to 16 hours of sleep a day (including naps). Consistent sleep times make it easier!
"Read" books with your baby. Reading can be talking about pictures. Babies this age like books with things they can feel or flaps they can lift.
Play together with blocks and other toys that encourage your baby to use her hands.
Babies learn to calm themselves from caregivers who are calm and make them feel safe. Help your baby learn she can calm down by talking softly, holding, rocking, or singing to her. Let her suck on her fingers or a pacifier.
Let your baby push things around, such as empty boxes, a "kiddie chair," or "push toys," so he can practice walking.
Encourage your baby to practice walking on her own. Baby walkers are not recommended. Let her hold your hands or hold onto furniture that is safe.

On This Page

Ways to monitor milestones

What most babies do by 1 year

Share with your child’s doctor

Tips and activities

May 15, 2026

Sources and Page Info

Print

Share

Facebook

LinkedIn

Twitter

Syndicate

Content Source

National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities (NCBDDD)

About This Page

Published:
September 4, 2025

Updated:
May 16, 2026
This page was last updated on this date. Updates may include minor edits, image changes, or other modifications to page content.

Reviewed:
May 16, 2026
The information on this page was last reviewed by subject matter experts to ensure accuracy.

Sources
Special acknowledgments to the subject matter experts and others who contributed to the review of data and selection of developmental milestones, especially Paul H. Lipkin, MD, Michelle M. Macias, MD, Julie F. Pajek, PhD, Judith S. Shaw, EdD, MPH, RN, Karnesha Slaughter, MPH, Jane K. Squires,
PhD, Toni M. Whitaker, MD, Lisa D. Wiggins, PhD, and Jennifer M. Zubler, MD.

Sincere gratitude to Natalia Benza, MD and José O. Rodríguez, MD, MBA for their thoughtful review of the Spanish-language translation of these milestones.

Learn the Signs. Act Early.

From birth to 5 years, your child should reach development milestones. Track your child’s development and act early if you have a concern.

View All

For Everyone

About

Early Intervention

CDC's Developmental Milestones

Milestone Tracker
App

All Resources

Resources for Families

Resources for Early Childhood Educators

Other Programs for Children

View all

Health Care Providers

Resources for Healthcare Providers

Sign up for Email Updates

Plays games with you, like pat-a-cake

Close

Waves “bye-bye”

Close

Calls a parent “mama” or “dada” or another special name

Close

Understands “no” (pauses briefly or stops when you say it)

Close

Puts something in a container, like a block in a cup

Close

Looks for things he sees you hide, like a toy under a blanket

Close

Pulls up to stand

Close

Walks, holding on to furniture

Close

Drinks from a cup without a lid, as you hold it

Close

Picks things up between thumb and pointer finger, like small bits of food

Close