URL: https://www.cdc.gov/act-early/milestones/6-months.html
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

Milestones by 6 Months | Learn the Signs. Act Early. | CDC

Skip directly to site content

Skip directly to search

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Milestones by 6 Months

For Everyone

May 15, 2026

Español

What to know

Learn about the developmental milestones that most babies do by six months of age.

See important information to share with your doctor.

Find tips and activities you can do for your six-month-old.

Ways to monitor milestones

How your child plays, learns, speaks, acts, and moves offers important clues about your child's development. Developmental milestones are things most children (75% or more) can do by a certain age.

Milestone checklists

Check the milestones your baby has reached by 6 months by completing a checklist, available below and in three additional formats:

CDC's free
Milestone Tracker
mobile app
, for iOS and Android devices

Web-based Digital Online Checklist

Printable checklist

Keep in mind

"Learn the Signs. Act Early
."
materials are not a substitute for standardized, validated
developmental screening tools
.

What most babies do by 6 months

Click the links below to view a photo or video of each milestone.

Social/Emotional Milestones

Knows familiar people

Likes to look at self in a mirror

Laughs

Language/Communication Milestones

Takes turns making sounds with you

Blows “raspberries” (sticks tongue out and blows)

Makes squealing noises

Cognitive Milestones (learning, thinking, problem-solving)

Puts things in her mouth to explore them

Reaches to grab a toy she wants

Closes lips to show she doesn’t want more food

Movement/Physical Development Milestones

Rolls from tummy to back

Pushes up with straight arms when on tummy

Leans on hands to support herself when sitting

See Also

More about physical development

Share with your child’s doctor

Things to share and consider

What are some things you and your baby do together?

What are some things your baby likes to do?

Is there anything your baby does or does not do that concerns you?

Has your baby lost any skills he/she once had?

Does your baby have any special healthcare needs or was he/she born prematurely?

If you or the doctor are still concerned

Ask for a referral to a specialist who can evaluate your child more; and
Call your state or territory's early intervention program to find out if your child can get services to help. Learn more and find the number at
cdc.gov/FindEI
.

Keep Reading

Concerned About Your Child's Development?

Tips and activities

What You Can Do for Your 6-month-old

As your baby’s first teacher, you can help his or her development.

As your baby's first teacher, you can help his or her learning and brain development. Try these simple tips and activities in a safe way. Talk with your baby's doctor and teachers if you have questions or for more ideas on how to help your baby's development.

Use "back and forth" play with your baby. When your baby smiles, you smile; when he makes sounds, you copy them. This helps him learn to be social.

"Read" to your baby every day by looking at colorful pictures in magazines or books and talk about them. Respond to her when she babbles and "reads" too. For example, if she makes sounds, say "Yes, that's the doggy!"

Point out new things to your baby and name them. For example, when on a walk, point out cars, trees, and animals.

More Parenting Tips and Activities

Sing to your baby and play music. This will help his brain develop.
Limit screen time (TV, tablets, phones, etc.) to video calling with loved ones. Screen time is not recommended for children younger than 2 years of age. Babies learn by talking, playing, and interacting with others.
When your baby looks at something, point to it and talk about it.
Put your baby on her tummy or back and put toys just out of reach. Encourage her to roll over to reach the toys.
Learn to read your baby's moods. If he's happy, keep doing what you are doing. If he's upset, take a break and comfort your baby.
Talk with your baby's doctor about when to start solid foods and what foods are choking risks. Breast milk or formula is still the most important source of "food" for your baby.
Learn when your baby is hungry or full. Pointing to foods, opening his mouth to a spoon, or getting excited when seeing food are signs that he is hungry. Others, like pushing food away, closing his mouth, or turning his head away from food tells you that he's had enough.
Help your baby learn she can calm down. Talk softly, hold, rock, or sing to her, or let her suck on her fingers or a pacifier. You may offer a favorite toy or stuffed animal while you hold or rock her.
Hold your baby up while she sits. Let her look around and give her toys to look at while she learns to balance herself.
Hold your baby with both of your hands securely under her arms and let her stand. Look around with your baby and name what you can see while she is standing.
Introduce your baby to different sounds and voices. For example, whisper, clap, or make funny noises. See if your baby looks or is curious and see which sounds she prefers.
Playing on the floor or play mat with your baby every day helps him to move, learn, and explore.
When he drops a toy on the floor, pick it up and give it back. This game helps him learn cause and effect.

On This Page

Ways to monitor milestones

What most babies do by 6 months

Share with your child’s doctor

Tips and activities

May 15, 2026

Sources and Page Info

Print

Share

Facebook

LinkedIn

Twitter

Syndicate

Content Source

National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities (NCBDDD)

About This Page

Published:
September 4, 2025

Updated:
May 16, 2026
This page was last updated on this date. Updates may include minor edits, image changes, or other modifications to page content.

Reviewed:
May 16, 2026
The information on this page was last reviewed by subject matter experts to ensure accuracy.

Sources
Special acknowledgments to the subject matter experts and others who contributed to the review of data and selection of developmental milestones, especially Paul H. Lipkin, MD, Michelle M. Macias, MD, Julie F. Pajek, PhD, Judith S. Shaw, EdD, MPH, RN, Karnesha Slaughter, MPH, Jane K. Squires,
PhD, Toni M. Whitaker, MD, Lisa D. Wiggins, PhD, and Jennifer M. Zubler, MD

Sincere gratitude to Natalia Benza, MD and José O. Rodríguez, MD, MBA for their thoughtful review of the Spanish-language translation of these milestones.

Learn the Signs. Act Early.

From birth to 5 years, your child should reach development milestones. Track your child’s development and act early if you have a concern.

View All

For Everyone

About

Early Intervention

CDC's Developmental Milestones

Milestone Tracker
App

All Resources

Resources for Families

Resources for Early Childhood Educators

Other Programs for Children

View all

Health Care Providers

Resources for Healthcare Providers

Sign up for Email Updates

Knows familiar people

Close

Likes to look at self in a mirror

Close

Laughs

Close

Takes turns making sounds with you

Close

Blows “raspberries” (sticks tongue out and blows)

Close

Makes squealing noises

Close

Puts things in her mouth to explore them

Close

Reaches to grab a toy she wants

Close

Closes lips to show she doesn’t want more food

Close

Rolls from tummy to back

Close

Pushes up with straight arms when on tummy

Close

Leans on hands to support herself when sitting

Close