URL: https://www.cdc.gov/act-early/milestones/index.html
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

CDC's Developmental Milestones | Learn the Signs. Act Early. | CDC

Skip directly to site content

Skip directly to search

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

CDC's Developmental Milestones

For Everyone

Feb. 16, 2026

What to know

Skills such as taking a first step, smiling for the first time, and waving “bye bye” are called developmental milestones.

Children reach milestones in how they play, learn, speak, act, and move.

Click on the age of your child to see the milestones:

Milestones by 2 Months

Learn about the developmental milestones that most babies do by two months of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 4 Months

Learn about the developmental milestones that most babies do by four months of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 6 Months

Learn about the developmental milestones that most babies do by six months of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 9 Months

Learn about the developmental milestones that most babies do by nine months of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 1 Year

Learn about the developmental milestones that most babies do by one year of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 15 Months

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by 15 months of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 18 Months

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by 18 months of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 2 Years

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by two years of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 30 Months

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by 30 months of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 3 Years

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by three years of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 4 Years

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by four years of age.

May 15, 2026

Milestones by 5 Years

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by five years of age.

May 15, 2026

Resources

Milestone checklists translated into
other languages

Print the milestone checklists
or click on your child's age above to complete the checklist online.

Developmental Milestone Checklists for WIC

Download
CDC's

Milestone Tracker
mobile app

Complete a checklist using the
Digital Online Checklist

Learn More about CDC's Developmental Milestones

To learn more about CDC's developmental milestones, visit the
About
Learn the Signs. Act Early.
page.

Learn the Signs. Act Early.
resources are not a substitute for standardized, validated
developmental screening tools
.

Developmental Milestone Videos

In this video, parents of young children share their personal experiences of using CDC’s “Learn the Signs. Act Early.” tools and resources to learn about child development, recognize the milestones their child should be reaching, and guide them about what to do if they ever become concerned.

In this Spanish-language video, two families share personal stories of how using CDC’s
Learn the Signs. Act Early.
resources help them learn about their child’s developmental milestones and support their children’s development.

Audio Description

Concerned about your child's development? Act early.

You know your child best.

Don't wait. If your child is not meeting one or more milestones, has lost skills he or she once had, or you have other concerns, act early. Talk with your child's doctor, share your concerns, and ask about developmental screening. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that children be screened for general development using standardized, validated tools at 9, 18, and 30 months and for autism at 18 and 24 months or whenever a parent or provider has a concern.

If you or the doctor are still concerned:

Ask for a referral to a specialist who can evaluate your child more; and

Call your state or territory's early intervention program to find out if your child can get services to help. Learn more and find the number at
cdc.gov/FindEI
.

For more on how to help your child, visit
cdc.gov/Concerned
.

On This Page

Click on the age of your child to see the milestones:

Resources

Developmental Milestone Videos

Concerned about your child's development? Act early.

Feb. 16, 2026

Sources and Page Info

Print

Share

Facebook

LinkedIn

Twitter

Syndicate

Content Source

National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities (NCBDDD)

About This Page

Published:
September 4, 2025

Updated:
February 17, 2026
This page was last updated on this date. Updates may include minor edits, image changes, or other modifications to page content.

Reviewed:
February 17, 2026
The information on this page was last reviewed by subject matter experts to ensure accuracy.

Sources
Special acknowledgments to the subject matter experts and others who contributed to the review of data and selection of developmental milestones, especially Paul H. Lipkin, MD, Michelle M. Macias, MD, Julie F. Pajek, PhD, Judith S. Shaw, EdD, MPH, RN, Karnesha Slaughter, MPH, Jane K. Squires, PhD, Toni M. Whitaker, MD, Lisa D. Wiggins, PhD, and Jennifer M. Zubler, MD.
Sincere gratitude to Natalia Benza, MD and José O. Rodríguez, MD, MBA for their thoughtful review of the Spanish-language translation of these milestones.

Learn the Signs. Act Early.

From birth to 5 years, your child should reach development milestones. Track your child’s development and act early if you have a concern.

View All

For Everyone

About

Early Intervention

CDC's Developmental Milestones

Milestone Tracker
App

All Resources

Resources for Families

Resources for Early Childhood Educators

Other Programs for Children

View all

Health Care Providers

Resources for Healthcare Providers

Sign up for Email Updates