URL: https://www.cdc.gov/act-early/milestones/2-years.html
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

Milestones by 2 Years | Learn the Signs. Act Early. | CDC

Skip directly to site content

Skip directly to search

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Milestones by 2 Years

For Everyone

May 15, 2026

Español

What to know

Learn about the developmental milestones that most children do by 2 years of age.

See important information to share with your doctor.

Find tips and activities you can do for your 2-year-old.

Ways to monitor milestones

How your child plays, learns, speaks, acts, and moves offers important clues about your child's development. Developmental milestones are things most children (75% or more) can do by a certain age.

Milestone checklists

Check the milestones your child has reached by 2 years by completing a checklist, available below and in three additional formats:

CDC's free
Milestone Tracker mobile app
, for iOS and Android devices

Web-based Digital Online Checklist

Printable checklist

Keep in mind

Learn the Signs. Act Early
. materials are not a substitute for standardized, validated
developmental screening tools
.

What most children do by 2 years

Click the links below to view a photo or video of each milestone.

Social/Emotional Milestones

Notices when others are hurt or upset, like pausing or looking sad when someone is crying

Looks at your face to see how to react in a new situation

Language/Communication Milestones

Points to things in a book when you ask, like “Where is the bear?”

Says at least two words together, like “More milk.”

Points to at least two body parts when you ask him to show you

Uses more gestures than just waving and pointing, like blowing a kiss or nodding yes

Cognitive Milestones (learning, thinking, problem-solving)

Holds something in one hand while using the other hand; for example, holding a container and taking the lid off

Tries to use switches, knobs, or buttons on a toy

Plays with more than one toy at the same time, like putting toy food on a toy plate

Movement/Physical Development Milestones

Kicks a ball

Runs

Walks (not climbs) up a few stairs with or without help

Eats with a spoon

See Also

More about physical development

Share with your child’s doctor

Things to share and consider

What are some things you and your child do together?

What are some things your child likes to do?

Is there anything your child does or does not do that concerns you?

Has your child lost any skills he/she once had?

Does your child have any special healthcare needs or was he/she born prematurely?

You know your child best.
Don't wait. If your child is not meeting one or more milestones, has lost skills he or she once had, or you have other concerns, act early. Talk with your child's doctor, share your concerns, and ask about developmental screening.

If you or the doctor are still concerned

Ask for a referral to a specialist who can evaluate your child more; and
Call your state or territory's early intervention program to find out if your child can get services to help. Learn more and find the number at
cdc.gov/FindEI
.

Keep Reading

Concerned About Your Child's Development?

Tips and activities

What You Can Do for Your 2-year-old

As your child's first teacher, you can help his or her development.

As your child's first teacher, you can help his or her learning and brain development. Try these simple tips and activities in a safe way. Talk with your child's doctor and teachers if you have questions or for more ideas on how to help your child's development.

Help your child learn how words sound, even if he can't say them clearly yet. For example, if your child says, "or nana," say "You want more banana."

Watch your child closely during playdates. Children this age play next to each other, but do not know how to share and solve problems. Show your child how to deal with conflicts by helping her share, take turns, and use words when possible.

Have your child help you get ready for mealtime, by letting him carry things to the table, such as plastic cups or napkins. Thank your child for helping.

More Parenting Tips and Activities

Give your child balls to kick, roll, and throw.
Give toys that teach your child how to make things work and how to solve problems. For example, give her toys where she can push a button and something happens.
Let your child play dress up with grown-up clothes, such as shoes, hats, and shirts. This helps him begin to pretend play.
Allow your child to eat as much or as little as she wants at each meal. Toddlers don't always eat the same amount or type of food each day. Your job is to offer her healthy foods and it's your child's job to decide if and how much she needs to eat.
Have steady routines for sleeping and feeding. Create a calm, quiet bedtime for your child. Put on his pajamas, brush his teeth, and read 1 or 2 books to him. Children this age need 11 to 14 hours of sleep a day (including naps). Consistent sleep times make it easier.
Ask your child's doctor and/or teachers about toilet training to know if your child is ready to start. Most children are not able to toilet train until 2 to 3 years old. Starting too early can cause stress and setbacks, which can cause training to take longer.
Use positive words when your child is being a good helper. Let him help with simple chores, such as putting toys or laundry in a basket.
Play with your child outside, by playing "ready, set, go." For example, pull your child back in a swing. Say "Ready, set....", then wait and say "Go" when you push the swing.
Let your child create simple art projects with you. Give your child crayons or put some finger paint on paper and let her explore by spreading it around and making dots. Hang it on the wall or refrigerator so your child can see it.
Use positive words and give more attention to behaviors you want to see ("wanted behaviors"), than to those you don't want to see. For example, say "Look how well you're eating with your spoon."
Let your child play with sand toys or plastic containers, spoons, or a funnel in the tub or in a sandbox.
Help your child do simple puzzles with shapes, colors, or animals. Name each piece when your child puts it in place.
Encourage your child's curiosity and help her learn and explore new things. Take her to the park, take walks, or go on a bus ride.
Sing songs, such as "Head, Shoulders, Knees, and Toes," to teach names of body parts. After singing it a few times, see if your child sings some of the words when you touch a body part and wait.
Limit screen time (TV, tablets, phones, etc.) to no more than 1 hour a day of a children's program with an adult present. Children learn by talking, playing, and interacting with others.
Encourage your child to play with blocks. Take turns building towers and knocking them down.
Ask your child to help you open the drawer when you put away clothes or open the door when you go outside.

On This Page

Ways to monitor milestones

What most children do by 2 years

Share with your child’s doctor

Tips and activities

May 15, 2026

Sources and Page Info

Print

Share

Facebook

LinkedIn

Twitter

Syndicate

Content Source

National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities (NCBDDD)

About This Page

Published:
September 4, 2025

Updated:
May 16, 2026
This page was last updated on this date. Updates may include minor edits, image changes, or other modifications to page content.

Reviewed:
May 16, 2026
The information on this page was last reviewed by subject matter experts to ensure accuracy.

Sources
Special acknowledgments to the subject matter experts and others who contributed to the review of data and selection of developmental milestones, especially Paul H. Lipkin, MD, Michelle M. Macias, MD, Julie F. Pajek, PhD, Judith S. Shaw, EdD, MPH, RN, Karnesha Slaughter, MPH, Jane K. Squires,
PhD, Toni M. Whitaker, MD, Lisa D. Wiggins, PhD, and Jennifer M. Zubler, MD.

Sincere gratitude to Natalia Benza, MD and José O. Rodríguez, MD, MBA for their thoughtful review of the Spanish-language translation of these milestones.

Learn the Signs. Act Early.

From birth to 5 years, your child should reach development milestones. Track your child’s development and act early if you have a concern.

View All

For Everyone

About

Early Intervention

CDC's Developmental Milestones

Milestone Tracker
App

All Resources

Resources for Families

Resources for Early Childhood Educators

Other Programs for Children

View all

Health Care Providers

Resources for Healthcare Providers

Sign up for Email Updates

Notices when others are hurt or upset, like pausing or looking sad when someone is crying

Close

Points to things in a book when you ask, like “Where is the bear?”

Close

Says at least two words together, like “More milk.”

Close

Points to at least two body parts when you ask him to show you

Close

Uses more gestures than just waving and pointing, like blowing a kiss or nodding yes

Close

Holds something in one hand while using the other hand; for example, holding a container and taking the lid off

Close

Tries to use switches, knobs, or buttons on a toy

Close

Plays with more than one toy at the same time, like putting toy food on a toy plate

Close

Kicks a ball

Close

Runs

Close

Walks (not climbs) up a few stairs with or without help

Close

Eats with a spoon

Close