URL: https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=8d767545-1eb9-45a5-bd16-e8a66e628fea
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: Public domain (US Government work, FDA-approved labeling)

openFDA label | set_id 8d767545-1eb9-45a5-bd16-e8a66e628fea | version 15 | effective 20250401 | Levetiracetam | Hikma Pharmaceuticals USA Inc.

## indications_and_usage
1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE Levetiracetam Injection is indicated for the treatment of partial-onset seizures in patients 1 month of age and older ( 1.1 ) Levetiracetam Injection is indicated for adjunctive therapy for the treatment of: Myoclonic seizures in patients 12 years of age and older with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy ( 1.2 ) Primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures in patients 6 years of age and older with idiopathic generalized epilepsy ( 1.3 ) Levetiracetam Injection is for intravenous use only as an alternative for patients when oral administration is temporarily not feasible ( 1.4 ) 1.1 Partial-Onset Seizures Levetiracetam Injection is indicated for the treatment of partial-onset seizures in patients 1 month of age and older. 1.2 Myoclonic Seizures in Patients with Juvenile Myoclonic Epilepsy Levetiracetam Injection is indicated as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures in patients 12 years of age and older with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. 1.3 Primary Generalized Tonic-Clonic Seizures Levetiracetam Injection is indicated as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures in patients 6 years of age and older with idiopathic generalized epilepsy. 1.4 Limitations of Use Levetiracetam Injection is for intravenous use only as an alternative for patients when oral administration is temporarily not feasible.
1.1 Partial-Onset Seizures Levetiracetam Injection is indicated for the treatment of partial-onset seizures in patients 1 month of age and older.
1.2 Myoclonic Seizures in Patients with Juvenile Myoclonic Epilepsy Levetiracetam Injection is indicated as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures in patients 12 years of age and older with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.
1.3 Primary Generalized Tonic-Clonic Seizures Levetiracetam Injection is indicated as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures in patients 6 years of age and older with idiopathic generalized epilepsy.

## dosage_and_administration
2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Levetiracetam Injection is for intravenous use only ( 2.1 ) Partial-Onset Seizures (monotherapy or adjunctive therapy) 1 Month to < 6 Months: 7 mg/kg twice daily; increase by 7 mg/kg twice daily every 2 weeks to recommended dose of 21 mg/kg twice daily ( 2.1 ) 6 Months to < 4 Years: 10 mg/kg twice daily; increase by 10 mg/kg twice daily every 2 weeks to recommended dose of 25 mg/kg twice daily ( 2.1 ) 4 Years to < 16 Years: 10 mg/kg twice daily; increase by 10 mg/kg twice daily every 2 weeks to recommended dose of 30 mg/kg twice daily ( 2.1 ) Adults 16 Years and Older: 500 mg twice daily; increase by 500 mg twice daily every 2 weeks to a recommended dose of 1500 mg twice daily ( 2.1 ) Myoclonic Seizures in Adults and Pediatric Patients 12 Years and Older 500 mg twice daily; increase by 500 mg twice daily every 2 weeks to recommended dose of 1500 mg twice daily ( 2.2 ) Primary Generalized Tonic-Clonic Seizures 6 Years to < 16 Years: 10 mg/kg twice daily; increase by 10 mg/kg twice daily every 2 weeks to recommended dose of 30 mg/kg twice daily ( 2.3 ) Adults 16 Years and Older: 500 mg twice daily; increase by 500 mg twice daily every 2 weeks to recommended dose of 1500 mg twice daily ( 2.3 ) Switching From or To Oral Levetiracetam When switching from or to oral Levetiracetam, the total daily dosage/frequency of Levetiracetam Injection should be equivalent to those of oral Levetiracetam ( 2.4, 2.5 ) See full prescribing information for preparation and administration instructions ( 2.6 ) and dosage adjustment in adults with renal impairment ( 2.7 ) 2.1 Dosing for Partial-Onset Seizures The recommended dosing for monotherapy and adjunctive therapy is the same as outlined below. There is no clinical study experience with administration of intravenous levetiracetam for a period longer than 4 days. Adults 16 Years of Age and Older Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 1000 mg/day, given as twice-daily dosing (500 mg twice daily). Additional dosing increments may be given (1000 mg/day additional every 2 weeks) to a maximum recommended daily dose of 3000 mg. There is no evidence that doses greater than 3000 mg/day confer additional benefit. Pediatric Patients 1 Month to < 6 Months Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 14 mg/kg in 2 divided doses (7 mg/kg twice daily). Increase the daily dose every 2 weeks by increments of 14 mg/kg to the recommended daily dose of 42 mg/kg (21 mg/kg twice daily). In the clinical trial, the mean daily dose was 35 mg/kg in this age group. 6 Months to < 4 Years Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 20 mg/kg in 2 divided doses (10 mg/kg twice daily). Increase the daily dose in 2 weeks by an increment of 20 mg/kg to the recommended daily dose of 50 mg/kg (25 mg/kg twice daily). If a patient cannot tolerate a daily dose of 50 mg/kg, the daily dose may be reduced. In the clinical trial, the mean daily dose was 47 mg/kg in this age group. 4 Years to < 16 Years Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 20 mg/kg in 2 divided doses (10 mg/kg twice daily). Increase the daily dose every 2 weeks by increments of 20 mg/kg to the recommended daily dose of 60 mg/kg (30 mg/kg twice daily). If a patient cannot tolerate a daily dose of 60 mg/kg, the daily dose may be reduced. In the clinical trial, the mean daily dose was 44 mg/kg. The maximum daily dose was 3000 mg/day. 2.2 Dosing for Myoclonic Seizures in Patients with Juvenile Myoclonic Epilepsy Initiate treatment with a dose of 1000 mg/day, given as twice-daily dosing (500 mg twice daily). Increase the dosage by 1000 mg/day every 2 weeks to the recommended daily dose of 3000 mg. The effectiveness of doses lower than 3000 mg/day has not been studied. 2.3 Dosing for Primary Generalized Tonic-Clonic Seizures Adults 16 Years of Age and Older Initiate treatment with a dose of 1000 mg/day, given as twice-daily dosing (500 mg twice daily). Increase dosage by 1000 mg/day every 2 weeks to the recommended daily dose of 3000 mg. The effectiveness of doses lower than 3000 mg/day has not been adequately studied. Pediatric Patients 6 to <16 Years of Age Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 20 mg/kg in 2 divided doses (10 mg/kg twice daily). Increase the daily dose every 2 weeks by increments of 20 mg/kg (10 mg/kg twice daily) to the recommended daily dose of 60 mg/kg (30 mg/kg twice daily). The effectiveness of doses lower than 60 mg/kg/day has not been adequately studied. 2.4 Switching from Oral Dosing When switching from oral Levetiracetam, the initial total daily intravenous dosage of Levetiracetam Injection should be equivalent to the total daily dosage and frequency of oral Levetiracetam. 2.5 Switching to Oral Dosing At the end of the intravenous treatment period, the patient may be switched to Levetiracetam oral administration at the equivalent daily dosage and frequency of the intravenous administration. 2.6 Preparation and Administration Instructions Levetiracetam Injection is for intravenous use only and should be diluted in 100 mL of a compatible diluent prior to administration. If a smaller volume is required (e.g., pediatric patients), the amount of diluent should be calculated to not exceed a maximum levetiracetam concentration of 15 mg per mL of diluted solution. Consideration should also be given to the total daily fluid intake of the patient. Levetiracetam injection should be administered as a 15-minute IV infusion. One vial of Levetiracetam Injection contains 500 mg levetiracetam (500 mg/5 mL). Levetiracetam Injection may be mixed with the following diluents and antiepileptic drugs and may be stored in polyvinyl chloride (PVC) bags. The diluted solution should not be stored for more than 4 hours at controlled room temperature [15-30ºC (59-86ºF)]. Diluents: Sodium chloride (0.9%) injection, USP Lactated Ringer’s injection Dextrose 5% injection, USP Other Antiepileptic Drugs: Lorazepam Diazepam Valproate sodium There are no data to support the physical compatibility of Levetiracetam Injection with antiepileptic drugs that are not listed above. Parenteral drug products should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration whenever solution and container permit. Product with particulate matter or discoloration should not be used. Any unused portion of the Levetiracetam Injection vial contents should be discarded. Adults See Table 1 for the recommended preparation and administration of Levetiracetam Injection for adults to achieve a dose of 500 mg, 1000 mg, or 1500 mg. Table 1: Preparation and Administration of Levetiracetam Injection for Adults Dose Withdraw Volume Volume of Diluent Infusion Time 500 mg 5 mL (5 mL vial) 100 mL 15 minutes 1000 mg 10 mL (two 5 mL vials) 100 mL 15 minutes 1500 mg 15 mL (three 5 mL vials) 100 mL 15 minutes For example, to prepare a 1000 mg dose, dilute 10 mL of Levetiracetam Injection in 100 mL of a compatible diluent and administer intravenously as a 15-minute infusion. Pediatric Patients When using Levetiracetam Injection for pediatric patients, dosing is weight-based (mg per kg). The following calculation should be used to determine the appropriate daily dose of Levetiracetam Injection for pediatric patients: Total daily dose (mL/day) = Daily dose (mg/kg/day) x patient weight (kg) ————————————————————— 100 mg/mL 2.7 Dosage Adjustments in Adult Patients with Renal Impairment Levetiracetam Injection dosing must be individualized according to the patient’s renal function status. Recommended dosage adjustments for adults with renal impairment are shown in Table 2. Information is unavailable for dosage adjustments in pediatric patients with renal impairment. In order to calculate the dose recommended for adult patients with renal impairment, creatinine clearance adjusted for body surface area must be calculated. To do this an estimate of the patient’s creatinine clearance (CLcr) in mL/min must first be calculated using the following formula: CLcr= [140-age (years)] x weight (kg) (x 0.85 for female patients) —————————————— 72 x serum creatinine (mg/dL) Then CLcr is adjusted for body surface area (BSA) as follows: CLcr (mL/min/ 1.73 m2)= CLcr (mL/min) x 1.73 ————————— BSA subject (m2) Table 2: Dosage Adjustment Regimen for Adult Patients with Renal Impairment Group Creatinine Clearance (mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) Dosage (mg) Frequency Normal > 80 500 to 1,500 Every 12 hours Mild 50 – 80 500 to 1,000 Every 12 hours Moderate 30 – 50 250 to 750 Every 12 hours Severe < 30 250 to 500 Every 12 hours ESRD patients using dialysis ------- 500 to 1,0001 Every 24 hours 1 1 Following dialysis, a 250 to 500 mg supplemental dose is recommended. 2.8 Discontinuation of Levetiracetam Injection Avoid abrupt withdrawal from Levetiracetam Injection in order to reduce the risk of increased seizure frequency and status epilepticus [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.7) ].
2.1 Dosing for Partial-Onset Seizures The recommended dosing for monotherapy and adjunctive therapy is the same as outlined below. There is no clinical study experience with administration of intravenous levetiracetam for a period longer than 4 days. Adults 16 Years of Age and Older Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 1000 mg/day, given as twice-daily dosing (500 mg twice daily). Additional dosing increments may be given (1000 mg/day additional every 2 weeks) to a maximum recommended daily dose of 3000 mg. There is no evidence that doses greater than 3000 mg/day confer additional benefit. Pediatric Patients 1 Month to < 6 Months Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 14 mg/kg in 2 divided doses (7 mg/kg twice daily). Increase the daily dose every 2 weeks by increments of 14 mg/kg to the recommended daily dose of 42 mg/kg (21 mg/kg twice daily). In the clinical trial, the mean daily dose was 35 mg/kg in this age group. 6 Months to < 4 Years Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 20 mg/kg in 2 divided doses (10 mg/kg twice daily). Increase the daily dose in 2 weeks by an increment of 20 mg/kg to the recommended daily dose of 50 mg/kg (25 mg/kg twice daily). If a patient cannot tolerate a daily dose of 50 mg/kg, the daily dose may be reduced. In the clinical trial, the mean daily dose was 47 mg/kg in this age group. 4 Years to < 16 Years Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 20 mg/kg in 2 divided doses (10 mg/kg twice daily). Increase the daily dose every 2 weeks by increments of 20 mg/kg to the recommended daily dose of 60 mg/kg (30 mg/kg twice daily). If a patient cannot tolerate a daily dose of 60 mg/kg, the daily dose may be reduced. In the clinical trial, the mean daily dose was 44 mg/kg. The maximum daily dose was 3000 mg/day.
2.2 Dosing for Myoclonic Seizures in Patients with Juvenile Myoclonic Epilepsy Initiate treatment with a dose of 1000 mg/day, given as twice-daily dosing (500 mg twice daily). Increase the dosage by 1000 mg/day every 2 weeks to the recommended daily dose of 3000 mg. The effectiveness of doses lower than 3000 mg/day has not been studied.
2.3 Dosing for Primary Generalized Tonic-Clonic Seizures Adults 16 Years of Age and Older Initiate treatment with a dose of 1000 mg/day, given as twice-daily dosing (500 mg twice daily). Increase dosage by 1000 mg/day every 2 weeks to the recommended daily dose of 3000 mg. The effectiveness of doses lower than 3000 mg/day has not been adequately studied. Pediatric Patients 6 to <16 Years of Age Initiate treatment with a daily dose of 20 mg/kg in 2 divided doses (10 mg/kg twice daily). Increase the daily dose every 2 weeks by increments of 20 mg/kg (10 mg/kg twice daily) to the recommended daily dose of 60 mg/kg (30 mg/kg twice daily). The effectiveness of doses lower than 60 mg/kg/day has not been adequately studied.
2.4 Switching from Oral Dosing When switching from oral Levetiracetam, the initial total daily intravenous dosage of Levetiracetam Injection should be equivalent to the total daily dosage and frequency of oral Levetiracetam.
2.5 Switching to Oral Dosing At the end of the intravenous treatment period, the patient may be switched to Levetiracetam oral administration at the equivalent daily dosage and frequency of the intravenous administration.
2.6 Preparation and Administration Instructions Levetiracetam Injection is for intravenous use only and should be diluted in 100 mL of a compatible diluent prior to administration. If a smaller volume is required (e.g., pediatric patients), the amount of diluent should be calculated to not exceed a maximum levetiracetam concentration of 15 mg per mL of diluted solution. Consideration should also be given to the total daily fluid intake of the patient. Levetiracetam injection should be administered as a 15-minute IV infusion. One vial of Levetiracetam Injection contains 500 mg levetiracetam (500 mg/5 mL). Levetiracetam Injection may be mixed with the following diluents and antiepileptic drugs and may be stored in polyvinyl chloride (PVC) bags. The diluted solution should not be stored for more than 4 hours at controlled room temperature [15-30ºC (59-86ºF)]. Diluents: Sodium chloride (0.9%) injection, USP Lactated Ringer’s injection Dextrose 5% injection, USP Other Antiepileptic Drugs: Lorazepam Diazepam Valproate sodium There are no data to support the physical compatibility of Levetiracetam Injection with antiepileptic drugs that are not listed above. Parenteral drug products should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration whenever solution and container permit. Product with particulate matter or discoloration should not be used. Any unused portion of the Levetiracetam Injection vial contents should be discarded. Adults See Table 1 for the recommended preparation and administration of Levetiracetam Injection for adults to achieve a dose of 500 mg, 1000 mg, or 1500 mg. Table 1: Preparation and Administration of Levetiracetam Injection for Adults Dose Withdraw Volume Volume of Diluent Infusion Time 500 mg 5 mL (5 mL vial) 100 mL 15 minutes 1000 mg 10 mL (two 5 mL vials) 100 mL 15 minutes 1500 mg 15 mL (three 5 mL vials) 100 mL 15 minutes For example, to prepare a 1000 mg dose, dilute 10 mL of Levetiracetam Injection in 100 mL of a compatible diluent and administer intravenously as a 15-minute infusion. Pediatric Patients When using Levetiracetam Injection for pediatric patients, dosing is weight-based (mg per kg). The following calculation should be used to determine the appropriate daily dose of Levetiracetam Injection for pediatric patients: Total daily dose (mL/day) = Daily dose (mg/kg/day) x patient weight (kg) ————————————————————— 100 mg/mL
2.7 Dosage Adjustments in Adult Patients with Renal Impairment Levetiracetam Injection dosing must be individualized according to the patient’s renal function status. Recommended dosage adjustments for adults with renal impairment are shown in Table 2. Information is unavailable for dosage adjustments in pediatric patients with renal impairment. In order to calculate the dose recommended for adult patients with renal impairment, creatinine clearance adjusted for body surface area must be calculated. To do this an estimate of the patient’s creatinine clearance (CLcr) in mL/min must first be calculated using the following formula: CLcr= [140-age (years)] x weight (kg) (x 0.85 for female patients) —————————————— 72 x serum creatinine (mg/dL) Then CLcr is adjusted for body surface area (BSA) as follows: CLcr (mL/min/ 1.73 m2)= CLcr (mL/min) x 1.73 ————————— BSA subject (m2) Table 2: Dosage Adjustment Regimen for Adult Patients with Renal Impairment Group Creatinine Clearance (mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) Dosage (mg) Frequency Normal > 80 500 to 1,500 Every 12 hours Mild 50 – 80 500 to 1,000 Every 12 hours Moderate 30 – 50 250 to 750 Every 12 hours Severe < 30 250 to 500 Every 12 hours ESRD patients using dialysis ------- 500 to 1,0001 Every 24 hours 1 1 Following dialysis, a 250 to 500 mg supplemental dose is recommended.
2.8 Discontinuation of Levetiracetam Injection Avoid abrupt withdrawal from Levetiracetam Injection in order to reduce the risk of increased seizure frequency and status epilepticus [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.7) ].

## dosage_and_administration_table
Dose | Withdraw Volume | Volume of Diluent | Infusion Time

500 mg | 5 mL (5 mL vial) | 100 mL | 15 minutes

1000 mg | 10 mL (two 5 mL vials) | 100 mL | 15 minutes

1500 mg | 15 mL (three 5 mL vials) | 100 mL | 15 minutes
Group | Creatinine Clearance (mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) | Dosage (mg) | Frequency

Normal | > 80 | 500 to 1,500 | Every 12 hours

Mild | 50 – 80 | 500 to 1,000 | Every 12 hours

Moderate | 30 – 50 | 250 to 750 | Every 12 hours

Severe | < 30 | 250 to 500 | Every 12 hours

ESRD patients using dialysis | ------- | 500 to 1,0001 | Every 24 hours 1
Dose | Withdraw Volume | Volume of Diluent | Infusion Time

500 mg | 5 mL (5 mL vial) | 100 mL | 15 minutes

1000 mg | 10 mL (two 5 mL vials) | 100 mL | 15 minutes

1500 mg | 15 mL (three 5 mL vials) | 100 mL | 15 minutes
Group | Creatinine Clearance (mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) | Dosage (mg) | Frequency

Normal | > 80 | 500 to 1,500 | Every 12 hours

Mild | 50 – 80 | 500 to 1,000 | Every 12 hours

Moderate | 30 – 50 | 250 to 750 | Every 12 hours

Severe | < 30 | 250 to 500 | Every 12 hours

ESRD patients using dialysis | ------- | 500 to 1,0001 | Every 24 hours 1

## dosage_forms_and_strengths
3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS One vial of Levetiracetam Injection contains 500 mg levetiracetam (500 mg/5 mL) as a clear, colorless solution. Injection: 500 mg/5 mL single dose vial ( 3 )

## how_supplied
16 HOW SUPPLIED 16.1 How Supplied Levetiracetam Injection 500 mg/5 mL injection is a clear, colorless, sterile solution. It is supplied in single-dose 5 mL vials, available in cartons of 25 vials (NDC 0143-9673-25). 16.2 Storage Store at 25ºC (77ºF); excursions permitted to 15-30ºC (59-86ºF) [see USP Controlled Room Temperature].
16.1 How Supplied Levetiracetam Injection 500 mg/5 mL injection is a clear, colorless, sterile solution. It is supplied in single-dose 5 mL vials, available in cartons of 25 vials (NDC 0143-9673-25).

## storage_and_handling
16.2 Storage Store at 25ºC (77ºF); excursions permitted to 15-30ºC (59-86ºF) [see USP Controlled Room Temperature].

## pediatric_use
8.4 Pediatric Use The safety and effectiveness of Levetiracetam Injection for the treatment of partial onset seizures in patients 1 month to 16 years of age have been established [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 ) and Clinical Studies ( 14.1 )]. The dosing recommendation in these pediatric patients varies according to age group and is weight-based [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.6 )]. The safety and effectiveness of Levetiracetam Injection as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures in adolescents 12 years of age and older with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy have been established [see Clinical Studies ( 14.2 )]. The safety and effectiveness of Levetiracetam Injection as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures in pediatric patients 6 years of age and older with idiopathic generalized epilepsy have been established [see Clinical Studies ( 14.3 )]. Safety and effectiveness for the treatment of partial-onset seizures in pediatric patients below the age of 1 month; adjunctive therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures in pediatric patients below the age of 12 years; and adjunctive therapy for the treatment of primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures in pediatric patients below the age of 6 years have not been established. A 3-month, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was performed to assess the neurocognitive and behavioral effects of Levetiracetam Injection as adjunctive therapy in 98 (Levetiracetam Injection N=64, placebo N=34) pediatric patients, ages 4 years to 16 years, with partial seizures that were inadequately controlled. The target dose was 60 mg/kg/day. Neurocognitive effects were measured by the Leiter-R Attention and Memory (AM) Battery, which measures various aspects of a child’s memory and attention. Although no substantive differences were observed between the placebo and drug treated groups in the median change from baseline in this battery, the study was not adequate to assess formal statistical non-inferiority of the drug and placebo. The Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL/6-18), a standardized validated tool used to assess a child’s competencies and behavioral/emotional problems, was also assessed in this study. An analysis of the CBCL/6-18 indicated, on average, a worsening in Levetiracetam Injection-treated patients in aggressive behavior, one of the eight syndrome scores [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )]. Juvenile Animal Toxicity Data Studies of levetiracetam in juvenile rats (dosed on postnatal days 4 through 52) and dogs (dosed from postnatal weeks 3 through 7) at doses of up to 1800 mg/kg/day (approximately 7 and 24 times, respectively, the maximum recommended pediatric dose of 60 mg/kg/day on a mg/m2 basis) did not demonstrate adverse effects on postnatal development.

## use_in_specific_populations
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS Pregnancy: Plasma levels of levetiracetam may be decreased; monitor closely during pregnancy. Based on animal data, may cause fetal harm ( 5.9 , 8.1 ) 8.1 Pregnancy Pregnancy Exposure Registry There is a pregnancy exposure registry that monitors pregnancy outcomes in women exposed to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), including Levetiracetam Injection, during pregnancy. Encourage women who are taking Levetiracetam Injection during pregnancy to enroll in the North American Antiepileptic Drug (NAAED) pregnancy registry by calling 1-888-233-2334 or visiting http://www.aedpregnancyregistry.org/. Risk Summary Prolonged experience with Levetiracetam Injection in pregnant women has not identified a drug- associated risk of major birth defects or miscarriage, based on published literature, which includes data from pregnancy registries, and reflects experience over two decades [see Human Data]. In animal studies, levetiracetam produced developmental toxicity (increased embryofetal and offspring mortality, increased incidences of fetal structural abnormalities, decreased embryofetal and offspring growth, neurobehavioral alterations in offspring) at doses similar to human therapeutic doses [see Animal Data]. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2-4% and 15-20%, respectively. The background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. Clinical Considerations Levetiracetam blood levels may decrease during pregnancy [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.10 )]. Physiological changes during pregnancy may affect levetiracetam concentration. Decrease in levetiracetam plasma concentrations has been observed during pregnancy. This decrease is more pronounced during the third trimester. Dose adjustments may be necessary to maintain clinical response. Data Human Data While available studies cannot definitively establish the absence of risk, data from the published literature and pregnancy registries have not established an association with levetiracetam use during pregnancy and major birth defects or miscarriage. Animal Data When levetiracetam (0, 400, 1200, or 3600 mg/kg/day) was administered orally to pregnant rats during the period of organogenesis, reduced fetal weights and increased incidence of fetal skeletal variations were observed at the highest dose tested. There was no evidence of maternal toxicity. The no-effect dose for adverse effects on embryofetal developmental in rats (1200 mg/kg/day) is approximately 4 times the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD) of 3000 mg on a body surface area (mg/m2) basis. Oral administration of levetiracetam (0, 200, 600, or 1800 mg/kg/day) to pregnant rabbits during the period of organogenesis resulted in increased embryofetal mortality and incidence of fetal skeletal variations at the mid and high dose and decreased fetal weights and increased incidence of fetal malformations at the high dose, which was associated with maternal toxicity. The no-effect dose for adverse effects on embryofetal development in rabbits (200 mg/kg/day) is approximately equivalent to the MRHD on a mg/m2 basis. Oral administration of levetiracetam (0, 70, 350, or 1800 mg/kg/day) to female rats throughout pregnancy and lactation led to an increased incidence of fetal skeletal variations, reduced fetal body weight, and decreased growth in offspring at the mid and high doses and increased pup mortality and neurobehavioral alterations in offspring at the highest dose tested. There was no evidence of maternal toxicity. The no-effect dose for adverse effects on pre-and postnatal development in rats (70 mg/kg/day) is less than the MRHD on a mg/m2 basis. Oral administration of levetiracetam to rats during the latter part of gestation and throughout lactation produced no adverse developmental or maternal effects at doses of up to 1800 mg/kg/day (6 times the MRHD on a mg/m2 basis). 8.2 Lactation Risk Summary Levetiracetam is excreted in human milk. There are no data on the effects of Levetiracetam Injection on the breastfed infant, or the effects on milk production. The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother’s clinical need for Levetiracetam Injection and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from Levetiracetam Injection or from the underlying maternal condition. 8.4 Pediatric Use The safety and effectiveness of Levetiracetam Injection for the treatment of partial onset seizures in patients 1 month to 16 years of age have been established [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 ) and Clinical Studies ( 14.1 )]. The dosing recommendation in these pediatric patients varies according to age group and is weight-based [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.6 )]. The safety and effectiveness of Levetiracetam Injection as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures in adolescents 12 years of age and older with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy have been established [see Clinical Studies ( 14.2 )]. The safety and effectiveness of Levetiracetam Injection as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures in pediatric patients 6 years of age and older with idiopathic generalized epilepsy have been established [see Clinical Studies ( 14.3 )]. Safety and effectiveness for the treatment of partial-onset seizures in pediatric patients below the age of 1 month; adjunctive therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures in pediatric patients below the age of 12 years; and adjunctive therapy for the treatment of primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures in pediatric patients below the age of 6 years have not been established. A 3-month, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was performed to assess the neurocognitive and behavioral effects of Levetiracetam Injection as adjunctive therapy in 98 (Levetiracetam Injection N=64, placebo N=34) pediatric patients, ages 4 years to 16 years, with partial seizures that were inadequately controlled. The target dose was 60 mg/kg/day. Neurocognitive effects were measured by the Leiter-R Attention and Memory (AM) Battery, which measures various aspects of a child’s memory and attention. Although no substantive differences were observed between the placebo and drug treated groups in the median change from baseline in this battery, the study was not adequate to assess formal statistical non-inferiority of the drug and placebo. The Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL/6-18), a standardized validated tool used to assess a child’s competencies and behavioral/emotional problems, was also assessed in this study. An analysis of the CBCL/6-18 indicated, on average, a worsening in Levetiracetam Injection-treated patients in aggressive behavior, one of the eight syndrome scores [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )]. Juvenile Animal Toxicity Data Studies of levetiracetam in juvenile rats (dosed on postnatal days 4 through 52) and dogs (dosed from postnatal weeks 3 through 7) at doses of up to 1800 mg/kg/day (approximately 7 and 24 times, respectively, the maximum recommended pediatric dose of 60 mg/kg/day on a mg/m2 basis) did not demonstrate adverse effects on postnatal development. 8.5 Geriatric Use There were 347 subjects in clinical studies of levetiracetam that were 65 years old and over. No overall differences in safety were observed between these subjects and younger subjects. There were insufficient numbers of elderly subjects in controlled trials of epilepsy to adequately assess the effectiveness of Levetiracetam Injection in these patients. Levetiracetam is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of adverse reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )]. 8.6 Renal Impairment Clearance of levetiracetam is decreased in patients with renal impairment and is correlated with creatinine clearance [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )]. Dosage adjustment is recommended for patients with impaired renal function and supplemental doses should be given to patients after dialysis [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.7 )].
8.6 Renal Impairment Clearance of levetiracetam is decreased in patients with renal impairment and is correlated with creatinine clearance [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )]. Dosage adjustment is recommended for patients with impaired renal function and supplemental doses should be given to patients after dialysis [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.7 )].

## clinical_pharmacology
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 12.1 Mechanism of Action The precise mechanism(s) by which levetiracetam exerts its antiepileptic effect is unknown. A saturable and stereoselective neuronal binding site in rat brain tissue has been described for levetiracetam. Experimental data indicate that this binding site is the synaptic vesicle protein SV2A, thought to be involved in the regulation of vesicle exocytosis. Although the molecular significance of levetiracetam binding to synaptic vesicle protein SV2A is not understood, levetiracetam and related analogs showed a rank order of affinity for SV2A which correlated with the potency of their antiseizure activity in audiogenic seizure-prone mice. These findings suggest that the interaction of levetiracetam with the SV2A protein may contribute to the antiepileptic mechanism of action of the drug. 12.2 Pharmacodynamics Effects on QTc Interval The effect of Levetiracetam Injection on QTc prolongation was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind, positive-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) and placebo-controlled crossover study of Levetiracetam Injection (1000 mg or 5000 mg) in 52 healthy subjects. The upper bound of the 90% confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc was below 10 milliseconds. Therefore, there was no evidence of significant QTc prolongation in this study. 12.3 Pharmacokinetics Equivalent doses of intravenous (IV) levetiracetam and oral levetiracetam result in equivalent Cmax, Cmin, and total systemic exposure to levetiracetam when the IV levetiracetam is administered as a 15-minute infusion. Overview Levetiracetam is rapidly and almost completely absorbed after oral administration. Levetiracetam injection and tablets are bioequivalent. The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam are linear and time-invariant, with low intra- and inter-subject variability. Levetiracetam is not significantly protein-bound (<10% bound) and its volume of distribution is close to the volume of intracellular and extracellular water. Sixty-six percent (66%) of the dose is renally excreted unchanged. The major metabolic pathway of levetiracetam (24% of dose) is an enzymatic hydrolysis of the acetamide group. It is not liver cytochrome P450 dependent. The metabolites have no known pharmacological activity and are renally excreted. Plasma half-life of levetiracetam across studies is approximately 6-8 hours. It is increased in the elderly (primarily due to impaired renal clearance) and in subjects with renal impairment. The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam are similar when used as monotherapy or as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of partial-onset seizures. Distribution The equivalence of levetiracetam injection and the oral formulation was demonstrated in a bioavailability study of 17 healthy volunteers. In this study, levetiracetam 1500 mg was diluted in 100 mL 0.9% sterile saline solution and was infused over 15 minutes. The selected infusion rate provided plasma concentrations of levetiracetam at the end of the infusion period similar to those achieved at Tmax after an equivalent oral dose. It is demonstrated that levetiracetam 1500 mg intravenous infusion is equivalent to levetiracetam 3 x 500 mg oral tablets. The time independent pharmacokinetic profile of levetiracetam was demonstrated following 1500 mg intravenous infusion for 4 days with BID dosing. The AUC(0-12) at steady-state was equivalent to AUCinf following an equivalent single dose. Levetiracetam and its major metabolite are less than 10% bound to plasma proteins; clinically significant interactions with other drugs through competition for protein binding sites are therefore unlikely. Metabolism Levetiracetam is not extensively metabolized in humans. The major metabolic pathway is the enzymatic hydrolysis of the acetamide group, which produces the carboxylic acid metabolite, ucb L057 (24% of dose) and is not dependent on any liver cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. The major metabolite is inactive in animal seizure models. Two minor metabolites were identified as the product of hydroxylation of the 2-oxo-pyrrolidine ring (2% of dose) and opening of the 2-oxo-pyrrolidine ring in position 5 (1% of dose). There is no enantiomeric interconversion of levetiracetam or its major metabolite. Elimination Levetiracetam plasma half-life in adults is 7 ± 1 hour and is unaffected by either dose, route of administration or repeated administration. Levetiracetam is eliminated from the systemic circulation by renal excretion as unchanged drug which represents 66% of administered dose. The total body clearance is 0.96 mL/min/kg and the renal clearance is 0.6 mL/min/kg. The mechanism of excretion is glomerular filtration with subsequent partial tubular reabsorption. The metabolite ucb L057 is excreted by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion with a renal clearance of 4 mL/min/kg. Levetiracetam elimination is correlated to creatinine clearance. Levetiracetam clearance is reduced in patients with renal impairment [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.6 ) and Use in Specific Populations ( 8.6 )]. Specific Populations Elderly Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were evaluated in 16 elderly subjects (age 61-88 years) with creatinine clearance ranging from 30 to 74 mL/min. Following oral administration of twice-daily dosing for 10 days, total body clearance decreased by 38% and the half-life was 2.5 hours longer in the elderly compared to healthy adults. This is most likely due to the decrease in renal function in these subjects. Pediatric Patients Intravenous Formulation A population pharmacokinetic analysis for the intravenous formulation was conducted in 49 pediatric patients (1 month to < 16 years of age) weighing 3-79 kg. Patients received levetiracetam as a 15-minute IV infusion at doses between 14 mg/kg/day and 60 mg/kg/day twice daily. Plasma concentrations and model derived steady-state exposure AUC (0-12) were within the range of the exposure observed in pediatric patients receiving equivalent doses of the oral solution. Oral Formulations Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were evaluated in 24 pediatric patients (age 6-12 years) after single oral dose (20 mg/kg) of the immediate release formulation of Levetiracetam. The body weight adjusted apparent clearance of levetiracetam was approximately 40% higher than in adults. A repeat dose pharmacokinetic study was conducted in pediatric patients (age 4-12 years) at doses of 20 mg/kg/day, 40 mg/kg/day, and 60 mg/kg/day of the immediate release formulation of Levetiracetam. The evaluation of the pharmacokinetic profile of levetiracetam and its metabolite (ucb L057) in 14 pediatric patients demonstrated rapid absorption of levetiracetam at all doses, with a Tmax of about 1 hour and a t1/2 of 5 hours across all dosing levels. The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam in pediatric patients was linear between 20 to 60 mg/kg/day. The potential interaction of levetiracetam with other AEDs was also evaluated in these patients. Levetiracetam had no significant effect on the plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, valproic acid, topiramate or lamotrigine. However, there was about a 22% increase of apparent clearance of levetiracetam when it was co-administered with an enzyme-inducing AED (e.g., carbamazepine). Following single dose administration (20 mg/kg) of a 10% oral solution to pediatric patients with epilepsy (1 month to < 4 years), levetiracetam was rapidly absorbed and peak plasma concentrations were observed approximately 1 hour after dosing. Levetiracetam half-life in pediatric patients 1 month to < 4 years with epilepsy was shorter (5.3 h) than in adults (7.2 h), and apparent clearance (1.5 mL/min/kg) was faster than in adults (0.96 mL/min/kg). Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that body weight was significantly correlated to the clearance of levetiracetam in pediatric patients; clearance increased with an increase in body weight. Pregnancy Levetiracetam levels may decrease during pregnancy [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.10 ) and Use in Specific Populations ( 8.1 )]. Gender Levetiracetam Cmax and AUC were 20% higher in women (N=11) compared to men (N=12). However, clearances adjusted for body weight were comparable. Race Formal pharmacokinetic studies of the effects of race have not been conducted. Cross-study comparisons involving Caucasians (N=12) and Asians (N=12), however, show that pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were comparable between the two races. Because levetiracetam is primarily renally excreted and there are no important racial differences in creatinine clearance, pharmacokinetic differences due to race are not expected. Renal Impairment The disposition of levetiracetam was studied in adult subjects with varying degrees of renal function. Total body clearance of levetiracetam is reduced in patients with impaired renal function by 40% in the mild group (CLcr = 50-80 mL/min), 50% in the moderate group (CLcr = 30-50 mL/min) and 60% in the severe renal impairment group (CLcr <30 mL/min). Clearance of levetiracetam is correlated with creatinine clearance. In anuric (end stage renal disease) patients, the total body clearance decreased 70% compared to normal subjects (CLcr >80mL/min). Approximately 50% of the pool of levetiracetam in the body is removed during a standard 4 hour hemodialysis procedure [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.7 )]. Hepatic Impairment In subjects with mild (Child-Pugh A) to moderate (Child-Pugh B) hepatic impairment, the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were unchanged. In patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh C), total body clearance was 50% that of normal subjects, but decreased renal clearance accounted for most of the decrease. No dose adjustment is needed for patients with hepatic impairment. Drug Interactions In vitro data on metabolic interactions indicate that levetiracetam is unlikely to produce, or be subject to, pharmacokinetic interactions. Levetiracetam and its major metabolite, at concentrations well above Cmax levels achieved within the therapeutic dose range, are neither inhibitors of, nor high affinity substrates for, human liver cytochrome P450 isoforms, epoxide hydrolase or UDP-glucuronidation enzymes. In addition, levetiracetam does not affect the in vitro glucuronidation of valproic acid. Potential pharmacokinetic interactions of or with levetiracetam were assessed in clinical pharmacokinetic studies (phenytoin, valproate, warfarin, digoxin, oral contraceptive, probenecid) and through pharmacokinetic screening in the placebo-controlled clinical studies in epilepsy patients. Phenytoin Levetiracetam Injection (3000 mg daily) had no effect on the pharmacokinetic disposition of phenytoin in patients with refractory epilepsy. Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were also not affected by phenytoin. Valproate Levetiracetam Injection (1500 mg twice daily) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of valproate in healthy volunteers. Valproate 500 mg twice daily did not modify the rate or extent of levetiracetam absorption or its plasma clearance or urinary excretion. There also was no effect on exposure to and the excretion of the primary metabolite, ucb L057. Other Antiepileptic Drugs Potential drug interactions between Levetiracetam Injection and other AEDs (carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone and valproate) were also assessed by evaluating the serum concentrations of levetiracetam and these AEDs during placebo-controlled clinical studies. These data indicate that levetiracetam does not influence the plasma concentration of other AEDs and that these AEDs do not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Effect of AEDs in Pediatric Patients There was about a 22% increase of apparent total body clearance of levetiracetam when it was co-administered with enzyme-inducing AEDs. Dose adjustment is not recommended. Levetiracetam had no effect on plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, valproate, topiramate, or lamotrigine. Oral Contraceptives Levetiracetam Injection (500 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics of an oral contraceptive containing 0.03 mg ethinyl estradiol and 0.15 mg levonorgestrel, or of the luteinizing hormone and progesterone levels, indicating that impairment of contraceptive efficacy is unlikely. Coadministration of this oral contraceptive did not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Digoxin Levetiracetam Injection (1000 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (ECG) of digoxin given as a 0.25 mg dose every day. Co-administration of digoxin did not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Warfarin Levetiracetam Injection (1000 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics of R and S warfarin. Prothrombin time was not affected by levetiracetam. Coadministration of warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Probenecid Probenecid, a renal tubular secretion blocking agent, administered at a dose of 500 mg four times a day, did not change the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam 1000 mg twice daily. Css max of the metabolite, ucb L057, was approximately doubled in the presence of probenecid while the fraction of drug excreted unchanged in the urine remained the same. Renal clearance of ucb L057 in the presence of probenecid decreased 60%, probably related to competitive inhibition of tubular secretion of ucb L057. The effect of Levetiracetam Injection on probenecid was not studied.

## pharmacokinetics
12.3 Pharmacokinetics Equivalent doses of intravenous (IV) levetiracetam and oral levetiracetam result in equivalent Cmax, Cmin, and total systemic exposure to levetiracetam when the IV levetiracetam is administered as a 15-minute infusion. Overview Levetiracetam is rapidly and almost completely absorbed after oral administration. Levetiracetam injection and tablets are bioequivalent. The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam are linear and time-invariant, with low intra- and inter-subject variability. Levetiracetam is not significantly protein-bound (<10% bound) and its volume of distribution is close to the volume of intracellular and extracellular water. Sixty-six percent (66%) of the dose is renally excreted unchanged. The major metabolic pathway of levetiracetam (24% of dose) is an enzymatic hydrolysis of the acetamide group. It is not liver cytochrome P450 dependent. The metabolites have no known pharmacological activity and are renally excreted. Plasma half-life of levetiracetam across studies is approximately 6-8 hours. It is increased in the elderly (primarily due to impaired renal clearance) and in subjects with renal impairment. The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam are similar when used as monotherapy or as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of partial-onset seizures. Distribution The equivalence of levetiracetam injection and the oral formulation was demonstrated in a bioavailability study of 17 healthy volunteers. In this study, levetiracetam 1500 mg was diluted in 100 mL 0.9% sterile saline solution and was infused over 15 minutes. The selected infusion rate provided plasma concentrations of levetiracetam at the end of the infusion period similar to those achieved at Tmax after an equivalent oral dose. It is demonstrated that levetiracetam 1500 mg intravenous infusion is equivalent to levetiracetam 3 x 500 mg oral tablets. The time independent pharmacokinetic profile of levetiracetam was demonstrated following 1500 mg intravenous infusion for 4 days with BID dosing. The AUC(0-12) at steady-state was equivalent to AUCinf following an equivalent single dose. Levetiracetam and its major metabolite are less than 10% bound to plasma proteins; clinically significant interactions with other drugs through competition for protein binding sites are therefore unlikely. Metabolism Levetiracetam is not extensively metabolized in humans. The major metabolic pathway is the enzymatic hydrolysis of the acetamide group, which produces the carboxylic acid metabolite, ucb L057 (24% of dose) and is not dependent on any liver cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. The major metabolite is inactive in animal seizure models. Two minor metabolites were identified as the product of hydroxylation of the 2-oxo-pyrrolidine ring (2% of dose) and opening of the 2-oxo-pyrrolidine ring in position 5 (1% of dose). There is no enantiomeric interconversion of levetiracetam or its major metabolite. Elimination Levetiracetam plasma half-life in adults is 7 ± 1 hour and is unaffected by either dose, route of administration or repeated administration. Levetiracetam is eliminated from the systemic circulation by renal excretion as unchanged drug which represents 66% of administered dose. The total body clearance is 0.96 mL/min/kg and the renal clearance is 0.6 mL/min/kg. The mechanism of excretion is glomerular filtration with subsequent partial tubular reabsorption. The metabolite ucb L057 is excreted by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion with a renal clearance of 4 mL/min/kg. Levetiracetam elimination is correlated to creatinine clearance. Levetiracetam clearance is reduced in patients with renal impairment [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.6 ) and Use in Specific Populations ( 8.6 )]. Specific Populations Elderly Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were evaluated in 16 elderly subjects (age 61-88 years) with creatinine clearance ranging from 30 to 74 mL/min. Following oral administration of twice-daily dosing for 10 days, total body clearance decreased by 38% and the half-life was 2.5 hours longer in the elderly compared to healthy adults. This is most likely due to the decrease in renal function in these subjects. Pediatric Patients Intravenous Formulation A population pharmacokinetic analysis for the intravenous formulation was conducted in 49 pediatric patients (1 month to < 16 years of age) weighing 3-79 kg. Patients received levetiracetam as a 15-minute IV infusion at doses between 14 mg/kg/day and 60 mg/kg/day twice daily. Plasma concentrations and model derived steady-state exposure AUC (0-12) were within the range of the exposure observed in pediatric patients receiving equivalent doses of the oral solution. Oral Formulations Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were evaluated in 24 pediatric patients (age 6-12 years) after single oral dose (20 mg/kg) of the immediate release formulation of Levetiracetam. The body weight adjusted apparent clearance of levetiracetam was approximately 40% higher than in adults. A repeat dose pharmacokinetic study was conducted in pediatric patients (age 4-12 years) at doses of 20 mg/kg/day, 40 mg/kg/day, and 60 mg/kg/day of the immediate release formulation of Levetiracetam. The evaluation of the pharmacokinetic profile of levetiracetam and its metabolite (ucb L057) in 14 pediatric patients demonstrated rapid absorption of levetiracetam at all doses, with a Tmax of about 1 hour and a t1/2 of 5 hours across all dosing levels. The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam in pediatric patients was linear between 20 to 60 mg/kg/day. The potential interaction of levetiracetam with other AEDs was also evaluated in these patients. Levetiracetam had no significant effect on the plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, valproic acid, topiramate or lamotrigine. However, there was about a 22% increase of apparent clearance of levetiracetam when it was co-administered with an enzyme-inducing AED (e.g., carbamazepine). Following single dose administration (20 mg/kg) of a 10% oral solution to pediatric patients with epilepsy (1 month to < 4 years), levetiracetam was rapidly absorbed and peak plasma concentrations were observed approximately 1 hour after dosing. Levetiracetam half-life in pediatric patients 1 month to < 4 years with epilepsy was shorter (5.3 h) than in adults (7.2 h), and apparent clearance (1.5 mL/min/kg) was faster than in adults (0.96 mL/min/kg). Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that body weight was significantly correlated to the clearance of levetiracetam in pediatric patients; clearance increased with an increase in body weight. Pregnancy Levetiracetam levels may decrease during pregnancy [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.10 ) and Use in Specific Populations ( 8.1 )]. Gender Levetiracetam Cmax and AUC were 20% higher in women (N=11) compared to men (N=12). However, clearances adjusted for body weight were comparable. Race Formal pharmacokinetic studies of the effects of race have not been conducted. Cross-study comparisons involving Caucasians (N=12) and Asians (N=12), however, show that pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were comparable between the two races. Because levetiracetam is primarily renally excreted and there are no important racial differences in creatinine clearance, pharmacokinetic differences due to race are not expected. Renal Impairment The disposition of levetiracetam was studied in adult subjects with varying degrees of renal function. Total body clearance of levetiracetam is reduced in patients with impaired renal function by 40% in the mild group (CLcr = 50-80 mL/min), 50% in the moderate group (CLcr = 30-50 mL/min) and 60% in the severe renal impairment group (CLcr <30 mL/min). Clearance of levetiracetam is correlated with creatinine clearance. In anuric (end stage renal disease) patients, the total body clearance decreased 70% compared to normal subjects (CLcr >80mL/min). Approximately 50% of the pool of levetiracetam in the body is removed during a standard 4 hour hemodialysis procedure [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.7 )]. Hepatic Impairment In subjects with mild (Child-Pugh A) to moderate (Child-Pugh B) hepatic impairment, the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were unchanged. In patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh C), total body clearance was 50% that of normal subjects, but decreased renal clearance accounted for most of the decrease. No dose adjustment is needed for patients with hepatic impairment. Drug Interactions In vitro data on metabolic interactions indicate that levetiracetam is unlikely to produce, or be subject to, pharmacokinetic interactions. Levetiracetam and its major metabolite, at concentrations well above Cmax levels achieved within the therapeutic dose range, are neither inhibitors of, nor high affinity substrates for, human liver cytochrome P450 isoforms, epoxide hydrolase or UDP-glucuronidation enzymes. In addition, levetiracetam does not affect the in vitro glucuronidation of valproic acid. Potential pharmacokinetic interactions of or with levetiracetam were assessed in clinical pharmacokinetic studies (phenytoin, valproate, warfarin, digoxin, oral contraceptive, probenecid) and through pharmacokinetic screening in the placebo-controlled clinical studies in epilepsy patients. Phenytoin Levetiracetam Injection (3000 mg daily) had no effect on the pharmacokinetic disposition of phenytoin in patients with refractory epilepsy. Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were also not affected by phenytoin. Valproate Levetiracetam Injection (1500 mg twice daily) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of valproate in healthy volunteers. Valproate 500 mg twice daily did not modify the rate or extent of levetiracetam absorption or its plasma clearance or urinary excretion. There also was no effect on exposure to and the excretion of the primary metabolite, ucb L057. Other Antiepileptic Drugs Potential drug interactions between Levetiracetam Injection and other AEDs (carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone and valproate) were also assessed by evaluating the serum concentrations of levetiracetam and these AEDs during placebo-controlled clinical studies. These data indicate that levetiracetam does not influence the plasma concentration of other AEDs and that these AEDs do not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Effect of AEDs in Pediatric Patients There was about a 22% increase of apparent total body clearance of levetiracetam when it was co-administered with enzyme-inducing AEDs. Dose adjustment is not recommended. Levetiracetam had no effect on plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, valproate, topiramate, or lamotrigine. Oral Contraceptives Levetiracetam Injection (500 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics of an oral contraceptive containing 0.03 mg ethinyl estradiol and 0.15 mg levonorgestrel, or of the luteinizing hormone and progesterone levels, indicating that impairment of contraceptive efficacy is unlikely. Coadministration of this oral contraceptive did not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Digoxin Levetiracetam Injection (1000 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (ECG) of digoxin given as a 0.25 mg dose every day. Co-administration of digoxin did not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Warfarin Levetiracetam Injection (1000 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics of R and S warfarin. Prothrombin time was not affected by levetiracetam. Coadministration of warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Probenecid Probenecid, a renal tubular secretion blocking agent, administered at a dose of 500 mg four times a day, did not change the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam 1000 mg twice daily. Css max of the metabolite, ucb L057, was approximately doubled in the presence of probenecid while the fraction of drug excreted unchanged in the urine remained the same. Renal clearance of ucb L057 in the presence of probenecid decreased 60%, probably related to competitive inhibition of tubular secretion of ucb L057. The effect of Levetiracetam Injection on probenecid was not studied.

## warnings_and_cautions
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS Behavioral abnormalities including psychotic symptoms, suicidal ideation, irritability, and aggressive behavior have been observed; monitor patients for psychiatric signs and symptoms ( 5.1 ) Monitor for somnolence and fatigue; advise patients not to drive or operate machinery until they have sufficient experience on Levetiracetam Injection ( 5.2 ) Serious Dermatological Reactions: Discontinue Levetiracetam Injection at the first sign of rash unless clearly not drug related ( 5.4 ) Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS)/Multiorgan Hypersensitivity: Discontinue if no alternative etiology ( 5.5 ) Coordination Difficulties: Monitor for ataxia, abnormal gait, and incoordination ( 5.6 ) Withdrawal Seizures: Levetiracetam Injection must be gradually withdrawn ( 5.7) 5.1 Behavioral Abnormalities and Psychotic Symptoms Levetiracetam Injection may cause behavioral abnormalities and psychotic symptoms. Patients treated with Levetiracetam Injection should be monitored for psychiatric signs and symptoms. Behavioral abnormalities In clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam, 13% of adult Levetiracetam-treated patients and 38% of pediatric Levetiracetam-treated patients (4 to 16 years of age), compared to 6% and 19% of adult and pediatric placebo-treated patients, experienced non-psychotic behavioral symptoms (reported as aggression, agitation, anger, anxiety, apathy, depersonalization, depression, emotional lability, hostility, hyperkinesias, irritability, nervousness, neurosis, and personality disorder). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was performed to assess the neurocognitive and behavioral effects of an oral formulation of Levetiracetam as adjunctive therapy in pediatric patients (4 to 16 years of age). The results from an exploratory analysis indicated a worsening in Levetiracetam-treated patients on aggressive behavior (one of eight behavior dimensions), as measured in a standardized and systematic way using a validated instrument, the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL/6-18). In clinical studies in pediatric patients 1 month to < 4 years of age, irritability was reported in 12% of the Levetiracetam-treated patients compared to 0% of placebo-treated patients. In clinical studies, 1.7% of adult Levetiracetam-treated patients discontinued treatment due to behavioral adverse reactions, compared to 0.2% of placebo-treated patients. The treatment dose was reduced in 0.8% of adult Levetiracetam-treated patients and in 0.5% of placebo-treated patients. Overall, 11% of Levetiracetam-treated pediatric patients experienced behavioral symptoms associated with discontinuation or dose reduction, compared to 6% of placebo-treated patients. Psychotic symptoms In clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam, 1% of Levetiracetam-treated adult patients, 2% of levetiracetam-treated pediatric patients 4 to 16 years of age, and 17% of Levetiracetam-treated pediatric patients 1 month to <4 years of age experienced psychotic symptoms, compared to 0.2%, 2%, and 5% in the corresponding age groups treated with placebo. In a controlled study that assessed the neurocognitive and behavioral effects of an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in pediatric patients 4 to 16 years of age, 1.6% of Levetiracetam-treated patients experienced paranoia, compared to 0% of placebo-treated patients. In the same study, 3.1% of Levetiracetam-treated patients experienced confusional state, compared to 0% of placebo-treated patients [see Use in Specific Populations ( 8.4 ) ]. In clinical studies, two (0.3%) Levetiracetam-treated adult patients were hospitalized, and their treatment was discontinued due to psychosis. Both events, reported as psychosis, developed within the first week of treatment and resolved within 1 to 2 weeks following treatment discontinuation. There was no difference between drug- and placebo-treated patients in the incidence of the pediatric patients who discontinued treatment due to psychotic and non-psychotic adverse reactions. 5.2 Somnolence and Fatigue Levetiracetam Injection may cause somnolence and fatigue. Patients should be monitored for somnolence and fatigue, and be advised not to drive or operate machinery until they have gained sufficient experience on Levetiracetam Injection to gauge whether it adversely affects their ability to drive or operate machinery. Somnolence In controlled clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in adult patients with partial-onset seizures, 15% of Levetiracetam-treated patients reported somnolence, compared to 8% of placebo-treated patients. There was no clear dose response up to 3000 mg/day. In a study in which there was no titration, about 45% of patients receiving levetiracetam 4000 mg/day reported somnolence. The somnolence was considered serious in 0.3% of Levetiracetam-treated patients, compared to 0% in the placebo group. About 3% of Levetiracetam-treated patients discontinued treatment due to somnolence, compared to 0.7% of placebo-treated patients. In 1.4% of Levetiracetam-treated patients and 0.9% of placebo-treated patients, the dose was reduced, while 0.3% of the Levetiracetam-treated patients were hospitalized due to somnolence. Asthenia In controlled clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in adult patients with partial-onset seizures, 15% of Levetiracetam-treated patients reported asthenia, compared to 9% of placebo-treated patients. Treatment was discontinued due to asthenia in 0.8% of Levetiracetam-treated patients as compared to 0.5% of placebo-treated patients. In 0.5% of Levetiracetam-treated patients and in 0.2% of placebo-treated patients, the dose was reduced due to asthenia. Somnolence and asthenia occurred most frequently within the first 4 weeks of treatment. In general, the incidences of somnolence and fatigue in the pediatric partial-onset seizure studies, and in pediatric and adult myoclonic and primary generalized tonic-clonic studies were comparable to those of the adult partial-onset seizure studies. 5.3 Anaphylaxis and Angioedema Levetiracetam Injection can cause anaphylaxis or angioedema after the first dose or at any time during treatment. Signs and symptoms in cases reported in the postmarketing setting have included hypotension, hives, rash, respiratory distress, and swelling of the face, lip, mouth, eye, tongue, throat, and feet. In some reported cases, reactions were life-threatening and required emergency treatment. If a patient develops signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis or angioedema, Levetiracetam Injection should be discontinued and the patient should seek immediate medical attention. Levetiracetam Injection should be discontinued permanently if a clear alternative etiology for the reaction cannot be established [see Contraindications ( 4 )]. 5.4 Serious Dermatological Reactions Serious dermatological reactions, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), have been reported in both pediatric and adult patients treated with Levetiracetam Injection. The median time of onset is reported to be 14 to 17 days, but cases have been reported at least four months after initiation of treatment. Recurrence of the serious skin reactions following rechallenge with Levetiracetam Injection has also been reported. Levetiracetam Injection should be discontinued at the first sign of a rash, unless the rash is clearly not drug-related. If signs or symptoms suggest SJS/TEN, use of this drug should not be resumed and alternative therapy should be considered. 5.5 Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS)/Multiorgan Hypersensitivity Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS), also known as multiorgan hypersensitivity, has been reported in patients taking antiepileptic drugs, including Levetiracetam Injection. These events can be fatal or life- threatening, particularly if diagnosis and treatment do not occur as early as possible. Levetiracetam Injection typically, although not exclusively, presents with fever, rash, lymphadenopathy, and/or facial swelling, in association with other organ system involvement, such as hepatitis, nephritis, hematological abnormalities, myocarditis, or myositis, sometimes resembling an acute viral infection. Eosinophilia is often present. Because this disorder is variable in its expression, other organ systems not noted here may be involved. It is important to note that early manifestations of hypersensitivity, such as fever or lymphadenopathy, may be present even though rash is not evident. If such signs or symptoms are present, the patient should be evaluated immediately. Levetiracetam Injection should be discontinued if an alternative etiology for the signs or symptoms cannot be established [see Contraindications ( 4 ) ]. 5.6 Coordination Difficulties Levetiracetam Injection may cause coordination difficulties. In controlled clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in adult patients with partial-onset seizures, 3.4% of Levetiracetam-treated patients experienced coordination difficulties, (reported as ataxia, abnormal gait, or incoordination) compared to 1.6% of placebo-treated patients. A total of 0.4% of patients in controlled clinical studies discontinued Levetiracetam treatment due to ataxia, compared to 0% of placebo-treated patients. In 0.7% of Levetiracetam-treated patients and in 0.2% of placebo-treated patients, the dose was reduced due to coordination difficulties, while one of the treated patients was hospitalized due to worsening of pre-existing ataxia. These events occurred most frequently within the first 4 weeks of treatment. Patients should be monitored for signs and symptoms of coordination difficulties and advised not to drive or operate machinery until they have gained sufficient experience on Levetiracetam Injection to gauge whether it could adversely affect their ability to drive or operate machinery. 5.7 Withdrawal Seizures As with most antiepileptic drugs, Levetiracetam Injection should generally be withdrawn gradually because of the risk of increased seizure frequency and status epilepticus. But if withdrawal is needed because of a serious adverse reaction, rapid discontinuation can be considered. 5.8 Hematologic Abnormalities Levetiracetam Injection can cause hematologic abnormalities. Hematologic abnormalities occurred in clinical trials and included decreases in white blood cell (WBC), neutrophil, and red blood cells counts (RBC); decreases in hemoglobin and hematocrit; and increases in eosinophil counts. Cases of agranulocytosis, pancytopenia, and thrombocytopenia have been reported in the postmarketing setting. A complete blood count is recommended in patients experiencing significant weakness, pyrexia, recurrent infections, or coagulation disorders. Partial-Onset Seizures Adults In controlled clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in adult patients with partial-onset seizures, minor but statistically significant decreases compared to placebo in total mean RBC (0.03 x 106/mm 3 ), mean hemoglobin (0.09 g/dL), and mean hematocrit (0.38%), were seen in Levetiracetam-treated patients. A total of 3.2% of Levetiracetam-treated and 1.8% of placebo-treated patients had at least one possibly significant (≤2.8 x 10 9 /L) decreased WBC, and 2.4% of Levetiracetam-treated and 1.4% of placebo-treated patients had at least one possibly significant (≤1.0 x 10 9 /L) decreased neutrophil count. Of the Levetiracetam-treated patients with a low neutrophil count, all but one rose towards or to baseline with continued treatment. No patient was discontinued secondary to low neutrophil counts. Pediatric Patients 4 Years to < 16 Years In a controlled study in pediatric patients age 4 years to <16 years, statistically significant decreases in WBC and neutrophil counts were seen in Levetiracetam-treated patients, as compared to placebo. The mean decreases from baseline in the Levetiracetam-treated group were -0.4 × 109/L and -0.3 × 10 9 /L, respectively, whereas there were small increases in the placebo group. Mean relative lymphocyte counts increased by 1.7% in Levetiracetam-treated patients, compared to a decrease of 4% in placebo-treated patients (statistically significant). More Levetiracetam-treated patients had a possibly clinically significant abnormally low WBC value (3% of Levetiracetam-treated patients versus 0% of placebo-treated patients); however, there was no apparent difference between treatment groups with respect to neutrophil count (5% on Levetiracetam versus 4.2% on placebo). No patient was discontinued because of low WBC or neutrophil count. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to assess the neurocognitive and behavioral effects of an oral formulation of Levetiracetam as adjunctive therapy in pediatric patients (4 to 16 years of age), 5 patients (8.6%) in the Levetiracetam-treated group and two patients (6.1%) in the placebo-treated group had high eosinophil count values that were possibly clinically significant (≥10% or ≥0.7X10 9 /L). 5.9 Increase in Blood Pressure In a randomized, placebo-controlled study in patients 1 month to <4 years of age using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam, a significantly higher risk of increased diastolic blood pressure was observed in the Levetiracetam-treated patients (17%), compared to placebo-treated patients (2%). There was no overall difference in mean diastolic blood pressure between the treatment groups. This disparity between the Levetiracetam and placebo treatment groups was not observed in the studies of older children or in adults. Monitor patients 1 month to <4 years of age for increases in diastolic blood pressure. 5.10 Seizure Control During Pregnancy Physiological changes may gradually decrease plasma levels of levetiracetam throughout pregnancy. This decrease is more pronounced during the third trimester. It is recommended that patients be monitored carefully during pregnancy. Close monitoring should continue through the postpartum period especially if the dose was changed during pregnancy.
5.1 Behavioral Abnormalities and Psychotic Symptoms Levetiracetam Injection may cause behavioral abnormalities and psychotic symptoms. Patients treated with Levetiracetam Injection should be monitored for psychiatric signs and symptoms. Behavioral abnormalities In clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam, 13% of adult Levetiracetam-treated patients and 38% of pediatric Levetiracetam-treated patients (4 to 16 years of age), compared to 6% and 19% of adult and pediatric placebo-treated patients, experienced non-psychotic behavioral symptoms (reported as aggression, agitation, anger, anxiety, apathy, depersonalization, depression, emotional lability, hostility, hyperkinesias, irritability, nervousness, neurosis, and personality disorder). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was performed to assess the neurocognitive and behavioral effects of an oral formulation of Levetiracetam as adjunctive therapy in pediatric patients (4 to 16 years of age). The results from an exploratory analysis indicated a worsening in Levetiracetam-treated patients on aggressive behavior (one of eight behavior dimensions), as measured in a standardized and systematic way using a validated instrument, the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL/6-18). In clinical studies in pediatric patients 1 month to < 4 years of age, irritability was reported in 12% of the Levetiracetam-treated patients compared to 0% of placebo-treated patients. In clinical studies, 1.7% of adult Levetiracetam-treated patients discontinued treatment due to behavioral adverse reactions, compared to 0.2% of placebo-treated patients. The treatment dose was reduced in 0.8% of adult Levetiracetam-treated patients and in 0.5% of placebo-treated patients. Overall, 11% of Levetiracetam-treated pediatric patients experienced behavioral symptoms associated with discontinuation or dose reduction, compared to 6% of placebo-treated patients. Psychotic symptoms In clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam, 1% of Levetiracetam-treated adult patients, 2% of levetiracetam-treated pediatric patients 4 to 16 years of age, and 17% of Levetiracetam-treated pediatric patients 1 month to <4 years of age experienced psychotic symptoms, compared to 0.2%, 2%, and 5% in the corresponding age groups treated with placebo. In a controlled study that assessed the neurocognitive and behavioral effects of an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in pediatric patients 4 to 16 years of age, 1.6% of Levetiracetam-treated patients experienced paranoia, compared to 0% of placebo-treated patients. In the same study, 3.1% of Levetiracetam-treated patients experienced confusional state, compared to 0% of placebo-treated patients [see Use in Specific Populations ( 8.4 ) ]. In clinical studies, two (0.3%) Levetiracetam-treated adult patients were hospitalized, and their treatment was discontinued due to psychosis. Both events, reported as psychosis, developed within the first week of treatment and resolved within 1 to 2 weeks following treatment discontinuation. There was no difference between drug- and placebo-treated patients in the incidence of the pediatric patients who discontinued treatment due to psychotic and non-psychotic adverse reactions.
5.2 Somnolence and Fatigue Levetiracetam Injection may cause somnolence and fatigue. Patients should be monitored for somnolence and fatigue, and be advised not to drive or operate machinery until they have gained sufficient experience on Levetiracetam Injection to gauge whether it adversely affects their ability to drive or operate machinery. Somnolence In controlled clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in adult patients with partial-onset seizures, 15% of Levetiracetam-treated patients reported somnolence, compared to 8% of placebo-treated patients. There was no clear dose response up to 3000 mg/day. In a study in which there was no titration, about 45% of patients receiving levetiracetam 4000 mg/day reported somnolence. The somnolence was considered serious in 0.3% of Levetiracetam-treated patients, compared to 0% in the placebo group. About 3% of Levetiracetam-treated patients discontinued treatment due to somnolence, compared to 0.7% of placebo-treated patients. In 1.4% of Levetiracetam-treated patients and 0.9% of placebo-treated patients, the dose was reduced, while 0.3% of the Levetiracetam-treated patients were hospitalized due to somnolence. Asthenia In controlled clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in adult patients with partial-onset seizures, 15% of Levetiracetam-treated patients reported asthenia, compared to 9% of placebo-treated patients. Treatment was discontinued due to asthenia in 0.8% of Levetiracetam-treated patients as compared to 0.5% of placebo-treated patients. In 0.5% of Levetiracetam-treated patients and in 0.2% of placebo-treated patients, the dose was reduced due to asthenia. Somnolence and asthenia occurred most frequently within the first 4 weeks of treatment. In general, the incidences of somnolence and fatigue in the pediatric partial-onset seizure studies, and in pediatric and adult myoclonic and primary generalized tonic-clonic studies were comparable to those of the adult partial-onset seizure studies.
5.3 Anaphylaxis and Angioedema Levetiracetam Injection can cause anaphylaxis or angioedema after the first dose or at any time during treatment. Signs and symptoms in cases reported in the postmarketing setting have included hypotension, hives, rash, respiratory distress, and swelling of the face, lip, mouth, eye, tongue, throat, and feet. In some reported cases, reactions were life-threatening and required emergency treatment. If a patient develops signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis or angioedema, Levetiracetam Injection should be discontinued and the patient should seek immediate medical attention. Levetiracetam Injection should be discontinued permanently if a clear alternative etiology for the reaction cannot be established [see Contraindications ( 4 )].
5.4 Serious Dermatological Reactions Serious dermatological reactions, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), have been reported in both pediatric and adult patients treated with Levetiracetam Injection. The median time of onset is reported to be 14 to 17 days, but cases have been reported at least four months after initiation of treatment. Recurrence of the serious skin reactions following rechallenge with Levetiracetam Injection has also been reported. Levetiracetam Injection should be discontinued at the first sign of a rash, unless the rash is clearly not drug-related. If signs or symptoms suggest SJS/TEN, use of this drug should not be resumed and alternative therapy should be considered.
5.5 Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS)/Multiorgan Hypersensitivity Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS), also known as multiorgan hypersensitivity, has been reported in patients taking antiepileptic drugs, including Levetiracetam Injection. These events can be fatal or life- threatening, particularly if diagnosis and treatment do not occur as early as possible. Levetiracetam Injection typically, although not exclusively, presents with fever, rash, lymphadenopathy, and/or facial swelling, in association with other organ system involvement, such as hepatitis, nephritis, hematological abnormalities, myocarditis, or myositis, sometimes resembling an acute viral infection. Eosinophilia is often present. Because this disorder is variable in its expression, other organ systems not noted here may be involved. It is important to note that early manifestations of hypersensitivity, such as fever or lymphadenopathy, may be present even though rash is not evident. If such signs or symptoms are present, the patient should be evaluated immediately. Levetiracetam Injection should be discontinued if an alternative etiology for the signs or symptoms cannot be established [see Contraindications ( 4 ) ].
5.6 Coordination Difficulties Levetiracetam Injection may cause coordination difficulties. In controlled clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in adult patients with partial-onset seizures, 3.4% of Levetiracetam-treated patients experienced coordination difficulties, (reported as ataxia, abnormal gait, or incoordination) compared to 1.6% of placebo-treated patients. A total of 0.4% of patients in controlled clinical studies discontinued Levetiracetam treatment due to ataxia, compared to 0% of placebo-treated patients. In 0.7% of Levetiracetam-treated patients and in 0.2% of placebo-treated patients, the dose was reduced due to coordination difficulties, while one of the treated patients was hospitalized due to worsening of pre-existing ataxia. These events occurred most frequently within the first 4 weeks of treatment. Patients should be monitored for signs and symptoms of coordination difficulties and advised not to drive or operate machinery until they have gained sufficient experience on Levetiracetam Injection to gauge whether it could adversely affect their ability to drive or operate machinery.
5.7 Withdrawal Seizures As with most antiepileptic drugs, Levetiracetam Injection should generally be withdrawn gradually because of the risk of increased seizure frequency and status epilepticus. But if withdrawal is needed because of a serious adverse reaction, rapid discontinuation can be considered.
5.8 Hematologic Abnormalities Levetiracetam Injection can cause hematologic abnormalities. Hematologic abnormalities occurred in clinical trials and included decreases in white blood cell (WBC), neutrophil, and red blood cells counts (RBC); decreases in hemoglobin and hematocrit; and increases in eosinophil counts. Cases of agranulocytosis, pancytopenia, and thrombocytopenia have been reported in the postmarketing setting. A complete blood count is recommended in patients experiencing significant weakness, pyrexia, recurrent infections, or coagulation disorders. Partial-Onset Seizures Adults In controlled clinical studies using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam in adult patients with partial-onset seizures, minor but statistically significant decreases compared to placebo in total mean RBC (0.03 x 106/mm 3 ), mean hemoglobin (0.09 g/dL), and mean hematocrit (0.38%), were seen in Levetiracetam-treated patients. A total of 3.2% of Levetiracetam-treated and 1.8% of placebo-treated patients had at least one possibly significant (≤2.8 x 10 9 /L) decreased WBC, and 2.4% of Levetiracetam-treated and 1.4% of placebo-treated patients had at least one possibly significant (≤1.0 x 10 9 /L) decreased neutrophil count. Of the Levetiracetam-treated patients with a low neutrophil count, all but one rose towards or to baseline with continued treatment. No patient was discontinued secondary to low neutrophil counts. Pediatric Patients 4 Years to < 16 Years In a controlled study in pediatric patients age 4 years to <16 years, statistically significant decreases in WBC and neutrophil counts were seen in Levetiracetam-treated patients, as compared to placebo. The mean decreases from baseline in the Levetiracetam-treated group were -0.4 × 109/L and -0.3 × 10 9 /L, respectively, whereas there were small increases in the placebo group. Mean relative lymphocyte counts increased by 1.7% in Levetiracetam-treated patients, compared to a decrease of 4% in placebo-treated patients (statistically significant). More Levetiracetam-treated patients had a possibly clinically significant abnormally low WBC value (3% of Levetiracetam-treated patients versus 0% of placebo-treated patients); however, there was no apparent difference between treatment groups with respect to neutrophil count (5% on Levetiracetam versus 4.2% on placebo). No patient was discontinued because of low WBC or neutrophil count. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to assess the neurocognitive and behavioral effects of an oral formulation of Levetiracetam as adjunctive therapy in pediatric patients (4 to 16 years of age), 5 patients (8.6%) in the Levetiracetam-treated group and two patients (6.1%) in the placebo-treated group had high eosinophil count values that were possibly clinically significant (≥10% or ≥0.7X10 9 /L).
5.9 Increase in Blood Pressure In a randomized, placebo-controlled study in patients 1 month to <4 years of age using an oral formulation of Levetiracetam, a significantly higher risk of increased diastolic blood pressure was observed in the Levetiracetam-treated patients (17%), compared to placebo-treated patients (2%). There was no overall difference in mean diastolic blood pressure between the treatment groups. This disparity between the Levetiracetam and placebo treatment groups was not observed in the studies of older children or in adults. Monitor patients 1 month to <4 years of age for increases in diastolic blood pressure.
5.10 Seizure Control During Pregnancy Physiological changes may gradually decrease plasma levels of levetiracetam throughout pregnancy. This decrease is more pronounced during the third trimester. It is recommended that patients be monitored carefully during pregnancy. Close monitoring should continue through the postpartum period especially if the dose was changed during pregnancy.

## contraindications
4 CONTRAINDICATIONS Levetiracetam Injection is contraindicated in patients with a hypersensitivity to levetiracetam. Reactions have included anaphylaxis and angioedema [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.3 )]. Known hypersensitivity to levetiracetam; angioedema and anaphylaxis have occurred ( 4 , 5.3 )

## description
11 DESCRIPTION Levetiracetam Injection is an antiepileptic drug available as a clear, colorless, sterile solution (100 mg/mL) for intravenous administration. The chemical name of levetiracetam, a single enantiomer, is (-)-(S)-α-ethyl-2-oxo-1-pyrrolidine acetamide, its molecular formula is C 8 H 14 N 2 O 2 and its molecular weight is 170.21. Levetiracetam is chemically unrelated to existing antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). It has the following structural formula: Levetiracetam, USP is a white to off-white crystalline powder with a faint odor and a bitter taste. It is very soluble in water (104.0 g/100 mL). It is freely soluble in chloroform (65.3 g/100 mL) and in methanol (53.6 g/100 mL), soluble in ethanol (16.5 g/100 mL), sparingly soluble in acetonitrile (5.7 g/100 mL) and practically insoluble in n-hexane. (Solubility limits are expressed as g/100 mL solvent.) Levetiracetam Injection contains 100 mg of levetiracetam per mL. It is supplied in single dose 5 mL vials containing 500 mg levetiracetam, water for injection, 45 mg sodium chloride, and buffered at approximately pH 5.5 with glacial acetic acid and 8.2 mg sodium acetate trihydrate. Levetiracetam Injection must be diluted prior to intravenous infusion [see Dosage and Administration( 2.6 )]. descrip

## package_label_principal_display_panel
PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL unit label carton label