URL: https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=1eb40c84-0cb3-4648-a39f-f4ebc4dbcb16
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: Public domain (US Government work, FDA-approved labeling)

openFDA label | set_id 1eb40c84-0cb3-4648-a39f-f4ebc4dbcb16 | version 4 | effective 20210402 | Piperacillin and Tazobactam | Fresenius Kabi USA, LLC

## indications_and_usage
1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is a combination of piperacillin, a penicillin-class antibacterial and tazobactam, a beta-lactamase inhibitor, indicated for the treatment of: Intra-abdominal infections in adult and pediatric patients 2 months of age and older ( 1.1 ) Nosocomial pneumonia in adult and pediatric patients 2 months of age and older ( 1.2 ) Skin and skin structure infections in adults ( 1.3 ) Female pelvic infections in adults ( 1.4 ) Community-acquired pneumonia in adults ( 1.5 ) To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and other antibacterial drugs, piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should be used only to treat or prevent infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria. ( 1.6 ) 1.1 Intra-abdominal Infections Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is indicated in adults and pediatric patients (2 months of age and older) for the treatment of appendicitis (complicated by rupture or abscess) and peritonitis caused by beta-lactamase producing isolates of Escherichia coli or the following members of the Bacteroides fragilis group: B. fragilis, B. ovatus, B. thetaiotaomicron, or B. vulgatus . 1.2 Nosocomial Pneumonia Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is indicated in adults and pediatric patients (2 months of age and older) for the treatment of nosocomial pneumonia (moderate to severe) caused by beta- lactamase producing isolates of Staphylococcus aureus and by piperacillin/tazobactam-susceptible Acinetobacter baumannii, Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Nosocomial pneumonia caused by P. aeruginosa should be treated in combination with an aminoglycoside) [see Dosage and Administration ( 2 )] . 1.3 Skin and Skin Structure Infections Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is indicated in adults for the treatment of uncomplicated and complicated skin and skin structure infections, including cellulitis, cutaneous abscesses and ischemic/ diabetic foot infections caused by beta-lactamase producing isolates of Staphylococcus aureus . 1.4 Female Pelvic Infections Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is indicated in adults for the treatment of postpartum endometritis or pelvic inflammatory disease caused by beta-lactamase producing isolates of Escherichia coli . 1.5 Community-acquired Pneumonia Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is indicated in adults for the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia (moderate severity only) caused by beta-lactamase producing isolates of Haemophilus influenzae . 1.6 Usage To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and other antibacterial drugs, piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should be used only to treat or prevent infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria. When culture and susceptibility information are available, they should be considered in selecting or modifying antibacterial therapy. In the absence of such data, local epidemiology and susceptibility patterns may contribute to the empiric selection of therapy.

## dosage_and_administration
2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Adult Patients With Indications Other Than Nosocomial Pneumonia; The usual daily dosage of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection for adults is 3.375 g every six hours totaling 13.5 g (12 g piperacillin/1.5 g tazobactam). ( 2.1 ) Adult Patients with Nosocomial Pneumonia: Initial presumptive treatment of patients with nosocomial pneumonia should start with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection at a dosage of 4.5 g every six hours plus an aminoglycoside, totaling 18 g (16 g piperacillin/2 g tazobactam). ( 2.2 ) Adult Patients with Renal Impairment: Dosage in patients with renal impairment (creatinine clearance ≤ 40 mL/min) and dialysis patients should be reduced, based on the degree of renal impairment. ( 2.3 ) Pediatric Patients by Indication and Age: See Table below ( 2.4 ) Recommended Dosage of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Pediatric Patients 2 months of Age and Older, Weighing up to 40 kg and With Normal Renal Function Age Appendicitis and /or Peritonitis Nosocomial Pneumonia 2 months to 9 months 90 mg/kg (80 mg piperacillin/10 mg tazobactam) every 8 (eight) hours 90 mg/kg (80 mg piperacillin/10 mg tazobactam) every 6 (six) hours Older than 9 months 112.5 mg/kg (100 mg piperacillin/12.5 mg tazobactam) every 8 (eight) hours 112.5 mg/kg (100 mg piperacillin/12.5 mg tazobactam) every 6 (six ) hours Administer piperacillin and tazobactam for injection by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes to both adult and pediatric patients ( 2.1 , 2.2 , 2.3 , 2.4 ). Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and aminoglycosides should be reconstituted, diluted, and administered separately. Co-administration via Y-site can be done under certain conditions. ( 2.7 ) See the full prescribing information for the preparation and administration instructions for piperacillin and tazobactam for injection single-dose vials. 2.1 Dosage in Adult Patients With Indications Other Than Nosocomial Pneumonia The usual total daily dosage of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection for adult patients with indications other than nosocomial pneumonia is 3.375 g every six hours [totaling 13.5 g (12 g piperacillin/ 1.5 g tazobactam)], to be administered by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes. The usual duration of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection treatment is from 7 to 10 days. 2.2 Dosage in Adult Patients With Nosocomial Pneumonia Initial presumptive treatment of adult patients with nosocomial pneumonia should start with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection at a dosage of 4.5 g every six hours plus an aminoglycoside, [totaling 18 g (16 g piperacillin/2 g tazobactam)], administered by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes. The recommended duration of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection treatment for nosocomial pneumonia is 7 to 14 days. Treatment with the aminoglycoside should be continued in patients from whom P. aeruginosa is isolated. 2.3 Dosage in Adult Patients With Renal Impairment In adult patients with renal impairment (creatinine clearance ≤ 40 mL/min) and dialysis patients (hemodialysis and CAPD), the intravenous dose of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should be reduced based on the degree of renal impairment. The recommended daily dosage of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection for patients with renal impairment administered by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes is described in Table 1 . Table 1: Recommended Dosage of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection in Patients with Normal Renal Function and Renal Impairment (As total grams piperacillin/tazobactam) # # Administer piperacillin and tazobactam for injection by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes. * Creatinine clearance for patients not receiving hemodialysis ** 0.75 g (0.67 g piperacillin/0.08 g tazobactam) should be administered following each hemodialysis session on hemodialysis days Creatinine clearance, mL/min All Indications (except nosocomial pneumonia) Nosocomial Pneumonia Greater than 40 mL/min 3.375 every 6 hours 4.5 every 6 hours 20 to 40 mL/min* 2.25 every 6 hours 3.375 every 6 hours Less than 20 mL/min* 2.25 every 8 hours 2.25 every 6 hours Hemodialysis** 2.25 every 12 hours 2.25 every 8 hours CAPD 2.25 every 12 hours 2.25 every 8 hours For patients on hemodialysis, the maximum dose is 2.25 g every twelve hours for all indications other than nosocomial pneumonia and 2.25 g every eight hours for nosocomial pneumonia. Since hemodialysis removes 30% to 40% of the administered dose, an additional dose of 0.75 g piperacillin and tazobactam for injection (0.67 g piperacillin/0.08 g tazobactam) should be administered following each dialysis period on hemodialysis days. No additional dosage of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is necessary for CAPD patients. 2.4 Dosage in Pediatric Patients With Appendicitis/Peritonitis or Nosocomial Pneumonia The recommended dosage for pediatric patients with appendicitis and/or peritonitis or nosocomial pneumonia aged 2 months of age and older, weighing up to 40 kg, and with normal renal function, is described in Table 2 [see Use in Specific Populations ( 8.4 ) and Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )] . Table 2: Recommended Dosage of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection in Pediatric Patients 2 Months of Age and Older, Weighing Up to 40 kg, and With Normal Renal Function # # Administer piperacillin and tazobactam for injection by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes Pediatric patients weighing over 40 kg and with normal renal function should receive the adult dose [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.1 , 2.2 )] . Age Appendicitis and/or Peritonitis Nosocomial Pneumonia 2 months to 9 months 90 mg/kg (80 mg piperacillin/10 mg tazobactam) every 8 (eight) hours 90 mg/kg (80 mg piperacillin/10 mg tazobactam) every 6 (six) hours Older than 9 months of age 112.5 mg/kg (100 mg piperacillin/12.5 mg tazobactam) every 8 (eight) hours 112.5 mg/kg (100 mg piperacillin/12.5 mg tazobactam) every 6 (six) hours Dosage of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in pediatric patients with renal impairment has not been determined. 2.5 Reconstitution and Dilution of Powder Formulations Single dose vials Reconstitute piperacillin and tazobactam for injection vials with a compatible reconstitution diluent from the list provided below. 2.25 g, 3.375 g, and 4.5 g piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should be reconstituted with 10 mL, 15 mL, and 20 mL, respectively. Swirl until dissolved. Compatible Reconstitution Diluents for Single Dose Vials 0.9% sodium chloride for injection Sterile water for injection Dextrose 5% Bacteriostatic saline/parabens Bacteriostatic water/parabens Bacteriostatic saline/benzyl alcohol Bacteriostatic water/benzyl alcohol Reconstituted piperacillin and tazobactam for injection solution for single dose vials should be further diluted (recommended volume per dose of 50 mL to 150 mL) in a compatible intravenous solution listed below. Administer by infusion over a period of at least 30 minutes. During the infusion it is desirable to discontinue the primary infusion solution. Compatible Intravenous Solutions for Single Dose Vials 0.9% sodium chloride for injection sterile water for injection ‡ Dextran 6% in saline Dextrose 5% LACTATED RINGER'S SOLUTION IS NOT COMPATIBLE WITH PIPERACILLIN AND TAZOBACTAM FOR INJECTION. ‡ Maximum recommended volume per dose of sterile water for injection is 50 mL. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should not be mixed with other drugs in a syringe or infusion bottle since compatibility has not been established. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is not chemically stable in solutions that contain only sodium bicarbonate and solutions that significantly alter the pH. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should not be added to blood products or albumin hydrolysates. Parenteral drug products should be inspected visually for particulate matter or discoloration prior to administration, whenever solution and container permit. Stability of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection Powder Formulations Following Reconstitution Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection reconstituted single dose vials is stable in glass and plastic containers (plastic syringes, I.V. bags and tubing) when used with compatible diluents. Discard unused portions after storage for 24 hours at room temperature or after storage for 48 hours at refrigerated temperature (2°C to 8°C [36°F to 46°F]). Single dose vials should be used immediately after reconstitution. Discard any unused portion after 24 hours if stored at room temperature (20°C to 25°C [68°F to 77°F]), or after 48 hours if stored at refrigerated temperature (2°C to 8°C [36°F to 46°F]). Vials should not be frozen after reconstitution. Stability studies in the I.V. bags have demonstrated chemical stability (potency, pH of reconstituted solution and clarity of solution) for up to 24 hours at room temperature and up to one week at refrigerated temperature. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection contains no preservatives. Appropriate consideration of aseptic technique should be used. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection reconstituted single dose vials can be used in ambulatory intravenous infusion pumps. Stability of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in an ambulatory intravenous infusion pump has been demonstrated for a period of 12 hours at room temperature. Each dose was reconstituted and diluted to a volume of 37.5 mL or 25 mL. One-day supplies of dosing solution were aseptically transferred into the medication reservoir (I.V. bags or cartridge). The reservoir was fitted to a preprogrammed ambulatory intravenous infusion pump per the manufacturer's instructions. Stability of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is not affected when administered using an ambulatory intravenous infusion pump. 2.7 Compatibility with Aminoglycosides Due to the in vitro inactivation of aminoglycosides by piperacillin, piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and aminoglycosides are recommended for separate administration. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and aminoglycosides should be reconstituted, diluted, and administered separately when concomitant therapy with aminoglycosides is indicated [see Drug Interactions ( 7.1 )] . In circumstances where co-administration via Y-site is necessary, piperacillin and tazobactam for injection are compatible for simultaneous co-administration via Y-site infusion only with the following aminoglycosides under the following conditions: Table 3: Compatibility with Aminoglycosides a Diluent volumes apply only to single dose vials. b The concentration ranges in Table 3 are based on administration of the aminoglycoside in divided doses (10 - 15 mg/kg/day in two daily doses for amikacin and 3 - 5 mg/kg/day in three daily doses for gentamicin). Administration of amikacin or gentamicin in a single daily dose or in doses exceeding those stated above via Y-site with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection has not been evaluated. See package insert for each aminoglycoside for complete Dosage and Administration instructions. Aminoglycoside Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection Dose (grams) Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection Diluent Volume a (mL) Aminoglycoside Concentration Range b (mg/mL) Acceptable Diluents Amikacin 2.25 3.375 4.5 50 100 150 1.75 - 7.5 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose Gentamicin 2.25 3.375 4.5 50 100 150 0.7 - 3.32 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose Only the concentration and diluents for amikacin or gentamicin with the dosages of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection listed above have been established as compatible for co-administration via Y-site infusion. Simultaneous co-administration via Y-site infusion in any manner other than listed above may result in inactivation of the aminoglycoside by piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is not compatible with tobramycin for simultaneous co-administration via Y-site infusion. Compatibility of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection with other aminoglycosides has not been established. Parenteral drug products should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration, whenever solution and container permit.

## dosage_and_administration_table
Recommended Dosage of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Pediatric Patients 2 months of Age and Older, Weighing up to 40 kg and With Normal Renal Function

Age | Appendicitis and /or Peritonitis | Nosocomial Pneumonia

2 months to 9 months | 90 mg/kg (80 mg piperacillin/10 mg tazobactam) every 8 (eight) hours | 90 mg/kg (80 mg piperacillin/10 mg tazobactam) every 6 (six) hours

Older than 9 months | 112.5 mg/kg (100 mg piperacillin/12.5 mg tazobactam) every 8 (eight) hours | 112.5 mg/kg (100 mg piperacillin/12.5 mg tazobactam) every 6 (six ) hours
Table 1: Recommended Dosage of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection in Patients with Normal Renal Function and Renal Impairment (As total grams piperacillin/tazobactam)
#

# Administer piperacillin and tazobactam for injection by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes.

* Creatinine clearance for patients not receiving hemodialysis

** 0.75 g (0.67 g piperacillin/0.08 g tazobactam) should be administered following each hemodialysis session on hemodialysis days

Creatinine clearance, mL/min | All Indications (except nosocomial pneumonia) | Nosocomial Pneumonia

Greater than 40 mL/min | 3.375 every 6 hours | 4.5 every 6 hours

20 to 40 mL/min* | 2.25 every 6 hours | 3.375 every 6 hours

Less than 20 mL/min* | 2.25 every 8 hours | 2.25 every 6 hours

Hemodialysis** | 2.25 every 12 hours | 2.25 every 8 hours

CAPD | 2.25 every 12 hours | 2.25 every 8 hours
Table 2: Recommended Dosage of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection in Pediatric Patients 2 Months of Age and Older, Weighing Up to 40 kg, and With Normal Renal Function
#

# Administer piperacillin and tazobactam for injection by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes Pediatric patients weighing over 40 kg and with normal renal function should receive the adult dose [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.1 , 2.2 )] .

Age | Appendicitis and/or Peritonitis | Nosocomial Pneumonia

2 months to 9 months | 90 mg/kg (80 mg piperacillin/10 mg tazobactam) every 8 (eight) hours | 90 mg/kg (80 mg piperacillin/10 mg tazobactam) every 6 (six) hours

Older than 9 months of age | 112.5 mg/kg (100 mg piperacillin/12.5 mg tazobactam) every 8 (eight) hours | 112.5 mg/kg (100 mg piperacillin/12.5 mg tazobactam) every 6 (six) hours
Table 3: Compatibility with Aminoglycosides

a Diluent volumes apply only to single dose vials.

b The concentration ranges in Table 3 are based on administration of the aminoglycoside in divided doses (10 - 15 mg/kg/day in two daily doses for amikacin and 3 - 5 mg/kg/day in three daily doses for gentamicin). Administration of amikacin or gentamicin in a single daily dose or in doses exceeding those stated above via Y-site with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection has not been evaluated. See package insert for each aminoglycoside for complete Dosage and Administration instructions.

Aminoglycoside | Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection Dose (grams) | Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection Diluent Volume a (mL) | Aminoglycoside Concentration Range b (mg/mL) | Acceptable Diluents

Amikacin | 2.25 3.375 4.5 | 50 100 150 | 1.75 - 7.5 | 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose

Gentamicin | 2.25 3.375 4.5 | 50 100 150 | 0.7 - 3.32 | 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose

## dosage_forms_and_strengths
3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP is supplied as a white to off-white powder in single dose vials in the following sizes: Each piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP 2.25 g single dose vial provides piperacillin sodium equivalent to 2 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.25 g of tazobactam. Each piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP 3.375 g single dose vial provides piperacillin sodium equivalent to 3 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.375 g of tazobactam. Each piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP 4.5 g single dose vial provides piperacillin sodium equivalent to 4 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.5 g of tazobactam. Piperacillin and tazobactam for Injection: 2.25 g, 3.375 g, and 4.5 g lyophilized powder for reconstitution in single-dose vials. ( 3 )

## how_supplied
16 HOW SUPPLIED/STORAGE AND HANDLING Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP are supplied as single-dose vials in the following sizes: Product Code Unit of Sale Strength Each PRX892120 NDC 63323-981-53 Unit of 10 2.25 grams per vial NDC 63323-981-41 20 mL Single-Dose Vial PRX892320 NDC 63323-983-53 Unit of 10 3.375 grams per vial NDC 63323-983-41 20 mL Single-Dose Vial PRX892250 NDC 63323-982-54 Unit of 10 4.5 grams per vial NDC 63323-982-43 50 mL Single-Dose Vial Each piperacillin and tazobactam for injection 2.25 grams per vial provides piperacillin sodium equivalent to 2 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.25 g of tazobactam. Each vial contains 4.7 mEq (108 mg) of sodium. Supplied 10 per carton Each piperacillin and tazobactam for injection 3.375 grams per vial provides piperacillin sodium equivalent to 3 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.375 g of tazobactam. Each vial contains 7.05 mEq (162 mg) of sodium. Supplied 10 per carton Each piperacillin and tazobactam for injection 4.5 grams per vial provides piperacillin sodium equivalent to 4 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.5 g of tazobactam. Each vial contains 9.4 mEq (216 mg) of sodium. Supplied 10 per carton Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP single-dose vials should be stored at 20° to 25°C (68° to 77°F) [see USP Controlled Room Temperature] prior to reconstitution. The container closure is not made with natural rubber latex.

## pediatric_use
8.4 Pediatric Use The safety and effectiveness of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection for intra-abdominal infections, and nosocomial pneumonia have been established in pediatric patients 2 months of age and older. Use of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in pediatric patients 2 months of age and older with intra-abdominal infections including appendicitis and/or peritonitis is supported by evidence from well-controlled studies and pharmacokinetic studies in adults and in pediatric patients. This includes a prospective, randomized, comparative, open-label clinical trial with 542 pediatric patients 2 to 12 years of age with intra-abdominal infections (including appendicitis and/ or peritonitis), in which 273 pediatric patients received piperacillin/ tazobactam [see Adverse Reactions ( 6.1 ) and Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )] . Use of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in pediatric patients 2 months of age and older with nosocomial pneumonia is supported by evidence from well-controlled studies in adults with nosocomial pneumonia, a simulation study performed with a population pharmacokinetic model, and a retrospective, cohort study of pediatric patients with nosocomial pneumonia in which 140 pediatric patients were treated with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and 267 patients treated with comparators (which included ticarcillin- clavulanate, carbapenems, ceftazidime, cefepime, or ciprofloxacin) [see Adverse Reactions ( 6.1 ) and Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )] . The safety and effectiveness of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection have not been established in pediatric patients less than 2 months of age [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12 ) and Dosage and Administration ( 2 )] . Dosage of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in pediatric patients with renal impairment has not been determined.

## use_in_specific_populations
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS Dosage in patients with renal impairment (creatinine clearance ≤ 40 mL/min) should be reduced based on the degree of renal impairment. ( 2.3 , 8.6 ) 8.1 Pregnancy Risk Summary Piperacillin and tazobactam cross the placenta in humans. However, there are insufficient data with piperacillin and/or tazobactam in pregnant women to inform a drug-associated risk for major birth defects and miscarriage. No fetal structural abnormalities were observed in rats or mice when piperacillin/tazobactam was administered intravenously during organogenesis at doses 1 to 2 times and 2 to 3 times the human dose of piperacillin and tazobactam, respectively, based on body-surface area (mg/m 2 ). However, fetotoxicity in the presence of maternal toxicity was observed in developmental toxicity and peri/postnatal studies conducted in rats (intraperitoneal administration prior to mating and throughout gestation or from gestation day 17 through lactation day 21) at doses less than the maximum recommended human daily dose based on body-surface area (mg/m 2 ) [see Data ] . The background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2-4% and 15-20%, respectively. Data Animal Data In embryo-fetal development studies in mice and rats, pregnant animals received intravenous doses of piperacillin/tazobactam up to 3,000/750 mg/kg/day during the period of organogenesis. There was no evidence of teratogenicity up to the highest dose evaluated, which is 1 to 2 times and 2 to 3 times the human dose of piperacillin and tazobactam, in mice and rats respectively, based on body-surface area (mg/m 2 ). Fetal body weights were reduced in rats at maternally toxic doses at or above 500/62.5 mg/kg/day, minimally representing 0.4 times the human dose of both piperacillin and tazobactam based on body-surface area (mg/m 2 ). A fertility and general reproduction study in rats using intraperitoneal administration of tazobactam or the combination piperacillin/tazobactam prior to mating and through the end of gestation, reported a decrease in litter size in the presence of maternal toxicity at 640 mg/ kg/day tazobactam (4 times the human dose of tazobactam based on body-surface area), and decreased litter size and an increase in fetuses with ossification delays and variations of ribs, concurrent with maternal toxicity at ≥ 640/160 mg/kg/day piperacillin/tazobactam (0.5 times and 1 times the human dose of piperacillin and tazobactam, respectively, based on body-surface area). Peri/postnatal development in rats was impaired with reduced pup weights, increased stillbirths, and increased pup mortality concurrent with maternal toxicity after intraperitoneal administration of tazobactam alone at doses ≥ 320 mg/kg/day (2 times the human dose based on body surface area) or of the combination piperacillin/ tazobactam at doses ≥ 640/160 mg/kg/day (0.5 times and 1 times the human dose of piperacillin and tazobactam, respectively, based on body-surface area) from gestation day 17 through lactation day 21. 8.2 Lactation Risk Summary Piperacillin is excreted in human milk; tazobactam concentrations in human milk have not been studied. No information is available on the effects of piperacillin and tazobactam on the breastfed child or on milk production. The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother's clinical need for piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed child from piperacillin and tazobactam for injection or from the underlying maternal condition. 8.4 Pediatric Use The safety and effectiveness of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection for intra-abdominal infections, and nosocomial pneumonia have been established in pediatric patients 2 months of age and older. Use of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in pediatric patients 2 months of age and older with intra-abdominal infections including appendicitis and/or peritonitis is supported by evidence from well-controlled studies and pharmacokinetic studies in adults and in pediatric patients. This includes a prospective, randomized, comparative, open-label clinical trial with 542 pediatric patients 2 to 12 years of age with intra-abdominal infections (including appendicitis and/ or peritonitis), in which 273 pediatric patients received piperacillin/ tazobactam [see Adverse Reactions ( 6.1 ) and Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )] . Use of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in pediatric patients 2 months of age and older with nosocomial pneumonia is supported by evidence from well-controlled studies in adults with nosocomial pneumonia, a simulation study performed with a population pharmacokinetic model, and a retrospective, cohort study of pediatric patients with nosocomial pneumonia in which 140 pediatric patients were treated with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and 267 patients treated with comparators (which included ticarcillin- clavulanate, carbapenems, ceftazidime, cefepime, or ciprofloxacin) [see Adverse Reactions ( 6.1 ) and Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )] . The safety and effectiveness of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection have not been established in pediatric patients less than 2 months of age [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12 ) and Dosage and Administration ( 2 )] . Dosage of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in pediatric patients with renal impairment has not been determined. 8.5 Geriatric Use Patients over 65 years are not at an increased risk of developing adverse effects solely because of age. However, dosage should be adjusted in the presence of renal impairment [see Dosage and Administration ( 2 )] . In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, usually starting at the low end of the dosing range, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection contains 54 mg (2.35 mEq) of sodium per gram of piperacillin in the combination product. At the usual recommended doses, patients would receive between 648 and 864 mg/day (28.2 and 37.6 mEq) of sodium. The geriatric population may respond with a blunted natriuresis to salt loading. This may be clinically important with regard to such diseases as congestive heart failure. This drug is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function. 8.6 Renal Impairment In patients with creatinine clearance ≤ 40 mL/min and dialysis patients (hemodialysis and CAPD), the intravenous dose of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should be reduced to the degree of renal function impairment [see Dosage and Administration ( 2 )] . 8.7 Hepatic Impairment Dosage adjustment of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is not warranted in patients with hepatic cirrhosis [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )] . 8.8 Patients with Cystic Fibrosis As with other semisynthetic penicillins, piperacillin therapy has been associated with an increased incidence of fever and rash in cystic fibrosis patients.

## clinical_pharmacology
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 12.1 Mechanism of Action Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is an antibacterial drug [see Microbiology ( 12.4 )] . 12.2 Pharmacodynamics The pharmacodynamic parameter for piperacillin/tazobactam that is most predictive of clinical and microbiological efficacy is time above MIC. 12.3 Pharmacokinetics The mean and coefficients of variation (CV%) for the pharmacokinetic parameters of piperacillin and tazobactam after multiple intravenous doses are summarized in Table 7 . Table 7: Mean (CV%) Piperacillin and Tazobactam PK Parameters a Piperacillin and tazobactam were given in combination, infused over 30 minutes. b Numbers in [ ]parentheses are coefficients of variation [CV%]. C max : maximum observed concentration, AUC: Area under the curve, CL= clearance, CL R = Renal clearance V=volume of distribution, T 1/2 = elimination half-life Piperacillin Piperacillin/Tazobactam Dose a C max (mcg/mL) AUC b (mcg • h/ mL) CL (mL/min) V (L) T 1/2 (h) CL R (mL/min) 2.25 g 134 131 [14] 257 17.4 0.79 -- 3.375 g 242 242 [10] 207 15.1 0.84 140 4.5 g 298 322 [16] 210 15.4 0.84 - Tazobactam Piperacillin/Tazobactam Dose a C max (mcg/mL) AUC b (mcg • h/ mL) CL (mL/min) V (L) T 1/2 (h) CL R (mL/min) 2.25 g 15 16.0 [21] 258 17.0 0.77 -- 3.375 g 24 25.0 [8] 251 14.8 0.68 166 4.5 g 34 39.8 [15] 206 14.7 0.82 -- Peak plasma concentrations of piperacillin and tazobactam are attained immediately after completion of an intravenous infusion of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. Piperacillin plasma concentrations, following a 30-minute infusion of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, were similar to those attained when equivalent doses of piperacillin were administered alone. Steady-state plasma concentrations of piperacillin and tazobactam were similar to those attained after the first dose due to the short half-lives of piperacillin and tazobactam. Distribution Both piperacillin and tazobactam are approximately 30% bound to plasma proteins. The protein binding of either piperacillin or tazobactam is unaffected by the presence of the other compound. Protein binding of the tazobactam metabolite is negligible. Piperacillin and tazobactam are widely distributed into tissues and body fluids including intestinal mucosa, gallbladder, lung, female reproductive tissues (uterus, ovary, and fallopian tube), interstitial fluid, and bile. Mean tissue concentrations are generally 50% to 100% of those in plasma. Distribution of piperacillin and tazobactam into cerebrospinal fluid is low in subjects with non-inflamed meninges, as with other penicillins (see Table 8 ). Table 8: Piperacillin/Tazobactam Concentrations in Selected Tissues and Fluids after Single 4 g/0.5 g 30-min IV Infusion of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection a Each subject provided a single sample. b Time from the start of the infusion. Tissue or Fluid N a Sampling period b (h) Mean PIP Concentration Range (mg/L) Tissue: Plasma Range Tazo Concentration Range (mg/L) Tazo Tissue: Plasma Range Skin 35 0.5 - 4.5 34.8 - 94.2 0.60 - 1.1 4.0 - 7.7 0.49 - 0.93 Fatty Tissue 37 0.5 - 4.5 4.0 - 10.1 0.097 - 0.115 0.7 - 1.5 0.10 - 0.13 Muscle 36 0.5 - 4.5 9.4 - 23.3 0.29 - 0.18 1.4 - 2.7 0.18 - 0.30 Proximal Intestinal Mucosa 7 1.5 - 2.5 31.4 0.55 10.3 1.15 Distal Intestinal Mucosa 7 1.5 - 2.5 31.2 0.59 14.5 2.1 Appendix 22 0.5 - 2.5 26.5 - 64.1 0.43 - 0.53 9.1 - 18.6 0.80 - 1.35 Metabolism Piperacillin is metabolized to a minor microbiologically active desethyl metabolite. Tazobactam is metabolized to a single metabolite that lacks pharmacological and antibacterial activities. Excretion Following single or multiple piperacillin and tazobactam for injection doses to healthy subjects, the plasma half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam ranged from 0.7 to 1.2 hours and was unaffected by dose or duration of infusion. Both piperacillin and tazobactam are eliminated via the kidney by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Piperacillin is excreted rapidly as unchanged drug with 68% of the administered dose excreted in the urine. Tazobactam and its metabolite are eliminated primarily by renal excretion with 80% of the administered dose excreted as unchanged drug and the remainder as the single metabolite. Piperacillin, tazobactam and desethyl piperacillin are also secreted into the bile. Specific Populations Renal Impairment After the administration of single doses of piperacillin/tazobactam to subjects with renal impairment, the half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam increases with decreasing creatinine clearance. At creatinine clearance below 20 mL/min, the increase in half-life is twofold for piperacillin and fourfold for tazobactam compared to subjects with normal renal function. Dosage adjustments for piperacillin and tazobactam for injection are recommended when creatinine clearance is below 40 mL/min in patients receiving the usual recommended daily dose of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. See Dosage and Administration ( 2 ) for specific recommendations for the treatment of patients with renal impairment. Hemodialysis removes 30% to 40% of a piperacillin/tazobactam dose with an additional 5% of the tazobactam dose removed as the tazobactam metabolite. Peritoneal dialysis removes approximately 6% and 21% of the piperacillin and tazobactam doses, respectively, with up to 16% of the tazobactam dose removed as the tazobactam metabolite. For dosage recommendations for patients undergoing hemodialysis [see Dosage and Administration ( 2 )] . Hepatic Impairment The half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam increases by approximately 25% and 18%, respectively, in patients with hepatic cirrhosis compared to healthy subjects. However, this difference does not warrant dosage adjustment of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection due to hepatic cirrhosis. Pediatrics Piperacillin and tazobactam pharmacokinetics were studied in pediatric patients 2 months of age and older. The clearance of both compounds is slower in the younger patients compared to older children and adults. In a population PK analysis, estimated clearance for 9 month-old to 12 year-old patients was comparable to adults, with a population mean (SE) value of 5.64 (0.34) mL/min/kg. The piperacillin clearance estimate is 80% of this value for pediatric patients 2 - 9 months old. In patients younger than 2 months of age, clearance of piperacillin is slower compared to older children; however, it is not adequately characterized for dosing recommendations. The population mean (SE) for piperacillin volume distribution is 0.243 (0.011) L/kg and is independent of age. Geriatrics The impact of age on the pharmacokinetics of piperacillin and tazobactam was evaluated in healthy male subjects, aged 18 - 35 years (n=6) and aged 65 to 80 years (n=12). Mean half-life for piperacillin and tazobactam was 32% and 55% higher, respectively, in the elderly compared to the younger subjects. This difference may be due to age-related changes in creatinine clearance. Race The effect of race on piperacillin and tazobactam was evaluated in healthy male volunteers. No difference in piperacillin or tazobactam pharmacokinetics was observed between Asian (n=9) and Caucasian (n=9) healthy volunteers who received single 4/0.5 g doses. Drug Interactions The potential for pharmacokinetic drug interactions between piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and aminoglycosides, probenecid, vancomycin, heparin, vecuronium, and methotrexate has been evaluated [see Drug Interactions ( 7 )] . 12.4 Microbiology Mechanism of Action Piperacillin sodium exerts bactericidal activity by inhibiting septum formation and cell wall synthesis of susceptible bacteria. In vitro , piperacillin is active against a variety of Gram-positive and Gram- negative aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Tazobactam sodium has little clinically relevant in vitro activity against bacteria due to its reduced affinity to penicillin-binding proteins. It is, however, a beta-lactamase inhibitor of the Molecular class A enzymes, including Richmond-Sykes class III (Bush class 2b & 2b') penicillinases and cephalosporinases. It varies in its ability to inhibit class II and IV (2a & 4) penicillinases. Tazobactam does not induce chromosomally- mediated beta-lactamases at tazobactam concentrations achieved with the recommended dosage regimen. Antimicrobial Activity Piperacillin/tazobactam has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections [see Indications and Usage ( 1 )] : Aerobic bacteria Gram-positive bacteria Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin susceptible isolates only) Gram-negative bacteria Acinetobacter baumannii Escherichia coli Haemophilus influenzae (excluding beta-lactamase negative, ampicillin-resistant isolates) Klebsiella pneumoniae Pseudomonas aeruginosa (given in combination with an aminoglycoside to which the isolate is susceptible) Anaerobic bacteria Bacteroides fragilis group ( B. fragilis, B. ovatus, B. thetaiotaomicron, and B. vulgatus ) The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. At least 90 percent of the following bacteria exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for piperacillin/tazobactam against isolates of similar genus or organism group. However, the efficacy of piperacillin/tazobactam in treating clinical infections caused by these bacteria has not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials. Aerobic bacteria Gram-positive bacteria Enterococcus faecalis (ampicillin or penicillin-susceptible isolates only) Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin susceptible isolates only) Streptococcus agalactiae † Streptococcus pneumoniae † (penicillin-susceptible isolates only) Streptococcus pyogenes † Viridans group streptococci † Gram-negative bacteria Citrobacter koseri Moraxella catarrhalis Morganella morganii Neisseria gonorrhoeae Proteus mirabilis Proteus vulgaris Serratia marcescens Providencia stuartii Providencia rettgeri Salmonella enterica Anaerobic bacteria Clostridium perfringens Bacteroides distasonis Prevotella melaninogenica † These are not beta-lactamase producing bacteria and, therefore, are susceptible to piperacillin alone. Susceptibility Testing For specific information regarding susceptibility test interpretive criteria and associated test methods and quality control standards recognized by FDA for this drug, please see: https://www.fda.gov/STIC.

## pharmacokinetics
12.3 Pharmacokinetics The mean and coefficients of variation (CV%) for the pharmacokinetic parameters of piperacillin and tazobactam after multiple intravenous doses are summarized in Table 7 . Table 7: Mean (CV%) Piperacillin and Tazobactam PK Parameters a Piperacillin and tazobactam were given in combination, infused over 30 minutes. b Numbers in [ ]parentheses are coefficients of variation [CV%]. C max : maximum observed concentration, AUC: Area under the curve, CL= clearance, CL R = Renal clearance V=volume of distribution, T 1/2 = elimination half-life Piperacillin Piperacillin/Tazobactam Dose a C max (mcg/mL) AUC b (mcg • h/ mL) CL (mL/min) V (L) T 1/2 (h) CL R (mL/min) 2.25 g 134 131 [14] 257 17.4 0.79 -- 3.375 g 242 242 [10] 207 15.1 0.84 140 4.5 g 298 322 [16] 210 15.4 0.84 - Tazobactam Piperacillin/Tazobactam Dose a C max (mcg/mL) AUC b (mcg • h/ mL) CL (mL/min) V (L) T 1/2 (h) CL R (mL/min) 2.25 g 15 16.0 [21] 258 17.0 0.77 -- 3.375 g 24 25.0 [8] 251 14.8 0.68 166 4.5 g 34 39.8 [15] 206 14.7 0.82 -- Peak plasma concentrations of piperacillin and tazobactam are attained immediately after completion of an intravenous infusion of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. Piperacillin plasma concentrations, following a 30-minute infusion of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, were similar to those attained when equivalent doses of piperacillin were administered alone. Steady-state plasma concentrations of piperacillin and tazobactam were similar to those attained after the first dose due to the short half-lives of piperacillin and tazobactam. Distribution Both piperacillin and tazobactam are approximately 30% bound to plasma proteins. The protein binding of either piperacillin or tazobactam is unaffected by the presence of the other compound. Protein binding of the tazobactam metabolite is negligible. Piperacillin and tazobactam are widely distributed into tissues and body fluids including intestinal mucosa, gallbladder, lung, female reproductive tissues (uterus, ovary, and fallopian tube), interstitial fluid, and bile. Mean tissue concentrations are generally 50% to 100% of those in plasma. Distribution of piperacillin and tazobactam into cerebrospinal fluid is low in subjects with non-inflamed meninges, as with other penicillins (see Table 8 ). Table 8: Piperacillin/Tazobactam Concentrations in Selected Tissues and Fluids after Single 4 g/0.5 g 30-min IV Infusion of Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection a Each subject provided a single sample. b Time from the start of the infusion. Tissue or Fluid N a Sampling period b (h) Mean PIP Concentration Range (mg/L) Tissue: Plasma Range Tazo Concentration Range (mg/L) Tazo Tissue: Plasma Range Skin 35 0.5 - 4.5 34.8 - 94.2 0.60 - 1.1 4.0 - 7.7 0.49 - 0.93 Fatty Tissue 37 0.5 - 4.5 4.0 - 10.1 0.097 - 0.115 0.7 - 1.5 0.10 - 0.13 Muscle 36 0.5 - 4.5 9.4 - 23.3 0.29 - 0.18 1.4 - 2.7 0.18 - 0.30 Proximal Intestinal Mucosa 7 1.5 - 2.5 31.4 0.55 10.3 1.15 Distal Intestinal Mucosa 7 1.5 - 2.5 31.2 0.59 14.5 2.1 Appendix 22 0.5 - 2.5 26.5 - 64.1 0.43 - 0.53 9.1 - 18.6 0.80 - 1.35 Metabolism Piperacillin is metabolized to a minor microbiologically active desethyl metabolite. Tazobactam is metabolized to a single metabolite that lacks pharmacological and antibacterial activities. Excretion Following single or multiple piperacillin and tazobactam for injection doses to healthy subjects, the plasma half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam ranged from 0.7 to 1.2 hours and was unaffected by dose or duration of infusion. Both piperacillin and tazobactam are eliminated via the kidney by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Piperacillin is excreted rapidly as unchanged drug with 68% of the administered dose excreted in the urine. Tazobactam and its metabolite are eliminated primarily by renal excretion with 80% of the administered dose excreted as unchanged drug and the remainder as the single metabolite. Piperacillin, tazobactam and desethyl piperacillin are also secreted into the bile. Specific Populations Renal Impairment After the administration of single doses of piperacillin/tazobactam to subjects with renal impairment, the half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam increases with decreasing creatinine clearance. At creatinine clearance below 20 mL/min, the increase in half-life is twofold for piperacillin and fourfold for tazobactam compared to subjects with normal renal function. Dosage adjustments for piperacillin and tazobactam for injection are recommended when creatinine clearance is below 40 mL/min in patients receiving the usual recommended daily dose of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. See Dosage and Administration ( 2 ) for specific recommendations for the treatment of patients with renal impairment. Hemodialysis removes 30% to 40% of a piperacillin/tazobactam dose with an additional 5% of the tazobactam dose removed as the tazobactam metabolite. Peritoneal dialysis removes approximately 6% and 21% of the piperacillin and tazobactam doses, respectively, with up to 16% of the tazobactam dose removed as the tazobactam metabolite. For dosage recommendations for patients undergoing hemodialysis [see Dosage and Administration ( 2 )] . Hepatic Impairment The half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam increases by approximately 25% and 18%, respectively, in patients with hepatic cirrhosis compared to healthy subjects. However, this difference does not warrant dosage adjustment of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection due to hepatic cirrhosis. Pediatrics Piperacillin and tazobactam pharmacokinetics were studied in pediatric patients 2 months of age and older. The clearance of both compounds is slower in the younger patients compared to older children and adults. In a population PK analysis, estimated clearance for 9 month-old to 12 year-old patients was comparable to adults, with a population mean (SE) value of 5.64 (0.34) mL/min/kg. The piperacillin clearance estimate is 80% of this value for pediatric patients 2 - 9 months old. In patients younger than 2 months of age, clearance of piperacillin is slower compared to older children; however, it is not adequately characterized for dosing recommendations. The population mean (SE) for piperacillin volume distribution is 0.243 (0.011) L/kg and is independent of age. Geriatrics The impact of age on the pharmacokinetics of piperacillin and tazobactam was evaluated in healthy male subjects, aged 18 - 35 years (n=6) and aged 65 to 80 years (n=12). Mean half-life for piperacillin and tazobactam was 32% and 55% higher, respectively, in the elderly compared to the younger subjects. This difference may be due to age-related changes in creatinine clearance. Race The effect of race on piperacillin and tazobactam was evaluated in healthy male volunteers. No difference in piperacillin or tazobactam pharmacokinetics was observed between Asian (n=9) and Caucasian (n=9) healthy volunteers who received single 4/0.5 g doses. Drug Interactions The potential for pharmacokinetic drug interactions between piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and aminoglycosides, probenecid, vancomycin, heparin, vecuronium, and methotrexate has been evaluated [see Drug Interactions ( 7 )] .

## warnings_and_cautions
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS Serious hypersensitivity reactions (anaphylactic/anaphylactoid) reactions have been reported in patients receiving piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. Discontinue piperacillin and tazobactam for injection if a reaction occurs. ( 5.1 ) Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection may cause severe cutaneous adverse reactions, such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis. Discontinue piperacillin and tazobactam for injection for progressive rashes. ( 5.2 ) Hematological effects (including bleeding, leukopenia and neutropenia) have occurred. Monitor hematologic tests during prolonged therapy. ( 5.3 ) As with other penicillins, piperacillin and tazobactam for injection may cause neuromuscular excitability or seizures. Patients receiving higher doses, especially in the presence of renal impairment may be at greater risk. Closely monitor patients with renal impairment or seizure disorders for signs and symptoms of neuromuscular excitability or seizures. ( 5.4 ) Nephrotoxicity in critically ill patients has been observed; the use of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection was found to be an independent risk factor for renal failure and was associated with delayed recovery of renal function as compared to other beta-lactam antibacterial drugs in a randomized, multicenter, controlled trial in critically ill patients. Based on this study, alternative treatment options should be considered in the critically ill population. If alternative treatment options are inadequate or unavailable, monitor renal function during treatment with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. ( 5.5 ) Clostridioides difficile -associated diarrhea: evaluate patients if diarrhea occurs. ( 5.7 ) 5.1 Hypersensitivity Adverse Reactions Serious and occasionally fatal hypersensitivity (anaphylactic/anaphylactoid) reactions (including shock) have been reported in patients receiving therapy with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. These reactions are more likely to occur in individuals with a history of penicillin, cephalosporin, or carbapenem hypersensitivity or a history of sensitivity to multiple allergens. Before initiating therapy with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, careful inquiry should be made concerning previous hypersensitivity reactions. If an allergic reaction occurs, piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should be discontinued and appropriate therapy instituted. 5.2 Severe Cutaneous Adverse Reactions Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection may cause severe cutaneous adverse reactions, such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis. If patients develop a skin rash they should be monitored closely and piperacillin and tazobactam for injection discontinued if lesions progress. 5.3 Hematologic Adverse Reactions Bleeding manifestations have occurred in some patients receiving beta-lactam drugs, including piperacillin. These reactions have sometimes been associated with abnormalities of coagulation tests such as clotting time, platelet aggregation and prothrombin time, and are more likely to occur in patients with renal failure. If bleeding manifestations occur, piperacillin and tazobactam for injection should be discontinued and appropriate therapy instituted. The leukopenia/neutropenia associated with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection administration appears to be reversible and most frequently associated with prolonged administration. Periodic assessment of hematopoietic function should be performed, especially with prolonged therapy, i.e., ≥ 21 days [see Adverse Reactions ( 6.1 )] . 5.4 Central Nervous System Adverse Reactions As with other penicillins, piperacillin and tazobactam may cause neuromuscular excitability or seizures. Patients receiving higher doses, especially patients with renal impairment may be at greater risk for central nervous system adverse reactions. Closely monitor patients with renal impairment or seizure disorders for signs and symptoms of neuromuscular excitability or seizures [see Adverse Reactions ( 6.2 )] . 5.5 Nephrotoxicity in Critically Ill Patients The use of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection was found to be an independent risk factor for renal failure and was associated with delayed recovery of renal function as compared to other beta-lactam antibacterial drugs in a randomized, multicenter, controlled trial in critically ill patients [see Adverse Reactions ( 6.1 )] . Based on this study, alternative treatment options should be considered in the critically ill population. If alternative treatment options are inadequate or unavailable, monitor renal function during treatment with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.3 )] . Combined use of piperacillin/tazobactam and vancomycin may be associated with an increased incidence of acute kidney injury [see Drug Interactions ( 7.3 )] . 5.6 Electrolyte Effects Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection contains a total of 2.35 mEq (54 mg) of Na + (sodium) per gram of piperacillin in the combination product. This should be considered when treating patients requiring restricted salt intake. Periodic electrolyte determinations should be performed in patients with low potassium reserves, and the possibility of hypokalemia should be kept in mind with patients who have potentially low potassium reserves and who are receiving cytotoxic therapy or diuretics. 5.7 Clostridioides difficile -Associated Diarrhea Clostridioides difficile -associated diarrhea (CDAD) has been reported with use of nearly all antibacterial agents, including piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, and may range in severity from mild diarrhea to fatal colitis. Treatment with antibacterial agents alters the normal flora of the colon leading to overgrowth of C. difficile . C. difficile produces toxins A and B which contribute to the development of CDAD. Hypertoxin producing strains of C. difficile cause increased morbidity and mortality, as these infections can be refractory to antimicrobial therapy and may require colectomy. CDAD must be considered in all patients who present with diarrhea following antibacterial drug use. Careful medical history is necessary since CDAD has been reported to occur over two months after the administration of antibacterial agents. If CDAD is suspected or confirmed, ongoing antibacterial drug use not directed against C. difficile may need to be discontinued. Appropriate fluid and electrolyte management, protein supplementation, antibacterial treatment of C. difficile , and surgical evaluation should be instituted as clinically indicated. 5.8 Development of Drug-Resistant Bacteria Prescribing piperacillin and tazobactam for injection in the absence of a proven or strongly suspected bacterial infection is unlikely to provide benefit to the patient and increases the risk of development of drug-resistant bacteria.

## contraindications
4 CONTRAINDICATIONS Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection is contraindicated in patients with a history of allergic reactions to any of the penicillins, cephalosporins, or beta-lactamase inhibitors. Patients with a history of allergic reactions to any of the penicillins, cephalosporins, or beta-lactamase inhibitors. ( 4 )

## description
11 DESCRIPTION Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP is an injectable antibacterial combination product consisting of the semisynthetic antibacterial piperacillin sodium and the beta-lactamase inhibitor tazobactam sodium for intravenous administration. Piperacillin sodium is derived from D(-)-α-aminobenzyl-penicillin. The chemical name of piperacillin sodium is sodium (2 S ,5 R ,6 R )-6-[( R )-2-(4-ethyl-2,3-dioxo-1-piperazine-carboxamido)-2-phenylacetamido]-3,3-dimethyl-7-oxo-4-thia-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]heptane-2-carboxylate. The structure of piperacillin sodium is: Tazobactam sodium, a derivative of the penicillin nucleus, is a penicillanic acid sulfone. Its chemical name is sodium (2 S ,3 S ,5 R )-3-methyl-7-oxo-3-(1 H -1,2,3-triazol-1-ylmethyl)-4-thia-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0] heptane-2-carboxylate-4,4-dioxide. The structure of tazobactam sodium is: Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP contains a total of 2.35 mEq (54 mg) of sodium (Na + ) per gram of piperacillin in the combination product. Piperacillin and tazobactam for injection, USP is a white to off-white sterile, cryodesiccated powder consisting of piperacillin and tazobactam as their sodium salts packaged in glass vials. The product does not contain excipients or preservatives. Each Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection 2.25 g single dose vial contains an amount of drug sufficient for withdrawal of piperacillin sodium equivalent to 2 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.25 g of tazobactam. Each Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection 3.375 g single dose vial contains an amount of drug sufficient for withdrawal of piperacillin sodium equivalent to 3 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.375 g of tazobactam. Each Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection 4.5 g single dose vial contains an amount of drug sufficient for withdrawal of piperacillin sodium equivalent to 4 grams of piperacillin and tazobactam sodium equivalent to 0.5 g of tazobactam. Meets USP Organic Impurities, Procedure 1. Piperacillin Sodium Structural Formula Tazobactam Sodium Structural Formula

## package_label_principal_display_panel
PACKAGE LABEL - PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - Piperacillin and Tazobactam 2.25 grams Single-Dose Vial Label NDC 63323- 981 -41 Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection, USP 2.25 grams per vial For intravenous use only. Preservative free. Single-Dose Vial Rx only PACKAGE LABEL - PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - Piperacillin and Tazobactam 2.25 grams Single-Dose Vial Tray Label NDC 63323- 981 -53 Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection, USP 2.25 grams per vial For intravenous use only. Preservative free. Rx only 10 x 2.25 grams Single-Dose Vials PACKAGE LABEL - PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - Piperacillin and Tazobactam 3.375 grams Single-Dose Vial Label NDC 63323- 983 -41 Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection, USP 3.375 grams per vial For intravenou s use only. Preservative free. Single-Dose Vial Rx only PACKAGE LABEL - PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - Piperacillin and Tazobactam 3.375 grams Single-Dose Vial Tray Label NDC 63323- 983 -53 Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection, USP 3.375 grams per vial For intravenous use only. Preservative free. Rx only 10 x 3.375 grams Single-Dose Vials PACKAGE LABEL - PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - Piperacillin and Tazobactam 4.5 grams Single-Dose Vial Label NDC 63323- 982 -43 Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection, USP 4.5 grams per vial For intravenous use only. Preservative free. Single-Dose Vial Rx only PACKAGE LABEL - PRINCIPAL DISPLAY PANEL - Piperacillin and Tazobactam 4.5 grams Single-Dose Vial Tray Label NDC 63323- 982 -54 Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection, USP 4.5 grams per vial For intravenous use only. Preservative free. Rx only 10 x 4.5 grams Single-Dose Vials vial carton vial carton vial carton