URL: https://hubble-live-assets.s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/bapm/file_asset/file/2864/Identification_and_Management_of_Neonatal_Hypoglycaemia_Sept_24.pdf
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

Identification and Management of 
Neonatal Hypoglycaemia
in the Full-Term Infant
(Birth – 72 hours)
A BAPM Framework for Practice
January 2024

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
© BAPM, 2024 2 
Contents 
M
embers of the working group .............................................................................................................. 3 
Language ................................................................................................................................................. 4 
Abbreviations .......................................................................................................................................... 5 
Executive Summary of Recommendations ............................................................................................. 6 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................ 7 
Process .................................................................................................................................................... 8 
Framework for Practice Section A: Practice Points ................................................................................. 9 
Framework for Practice Section B: Synopsis of supporting evidence ................................................... 14 
Appendix 1. Parent Information Sheet: Protecting your baby from low blood glucose ....................... 22 
Appendix 2. Management of reluctant feeding in healthy term infants ............................................... 26 
Appendix 3: Use of glucose 40% oral gel .............................................................................................. 28 
Appendix 4: Intravenous dextrose concentration................................................................................. 29 
Appendix 5: Point of Care testing for blood glucose in newborn babies ............................................. 30 
References ............................................................................................................................................ 32 
Flowchart A ........................................................................................................................................... 38 
Flowchart B ........................................................................................................................................... 39 
Flowchart C ........................................................................................................................................... 40 
Flowchart D ........................................................................................................................................... 41 
D
ocument updates 
Date Page Changes made 
20/06/2024 Page 10, 
point 8. 
Clarification added “A repeat glucose measurement is indicated only if 
recommended by the hypoglycaemia guidance.” 
16/09/2024 Page 29 Correction made to glucose infusion rate. “Glucose infusion rate (mg/kg/min) = 
[infusion rate (ml/kg/day) / 144] x glucose concentration (%)” 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
 
   
© BAPM, 2024  3 
Members of the working group 
 
Chair (2023 Revision) 
Dr Frances O’Brien Consultant Neonatologist, University of Oxford Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust 
 
Chair (2017) and group member (2023) 
Professor James 
Boardman 
Professor of Neonatal Medicine, University of Edinburgh 
 
Members 
Dr Alexandra Downes Higher Specialist Trainee, Neonatal Medicine, London 
Dr Ritika R Kapoor Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist, King’s Collage Hospital, London 
Professor Shalini Ojha Professor of Neonatal Medicine, University of Nottingham 
Dr Pratik Shah Consultant Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Royal London Children’s 
Hospital, London 
Dr Sunita Seal 
Ms Kath Townsend 
Consultant Neonatologist, Bradford Teaching Hospitals, Bradford 
Infant Feeding Specialist Midwife, Great Western Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Swindon 
Ms Anne Woods Deputy Programme Director UNICEF UK Baby Friendly Initiative 
 
 
 
We are grateful to Mrs Katy Heaney, Consultant Clinical Scientist and POCT Speciality lead, Frimley 
Health NHS Foundation Trust and Dr Charles van Heyningen, Chemical Pathologist, Royal College of 
Pathologists for expert advice about point of care testing and blood glucose measurement in 
neonates. 
 
The working group would like to acknowledge and thank the original working group members for 
their contribution to this work   

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
 
   
© BAPM, 2024  4 
Language  
 
The British Association of Perinatal Medicine is committed to continuously fostering a diverse 
environment. We acknowledge the effect language can have on individuals and populations. This 
guideline makes recommendations for women and people who are pregnant and or breastfeeding. 
For simplicity of language, the guideline uses the terms women and mothers throughout, but this 
should be taken to also include people who do not identify as women but who are pregnant, in 
labour and in the postnatal period. The term breastfeeding is also used but should be taken to 
include those who term this method of feeding as chest or body feeding.  When discussing with a 
person who does not identify as a woman, please ask them their preferred pronouns and 
terminology. 
 
This framework/document is specific to the UK context and to aid the creation and review of 
documents designed for the healthcare professional audience. Therefore, it may not be relevant in 
other settings. We also acknowledge that we may not get the language right every time, and 
welcome feedback on our work. 
  

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
 
   
© BAPM, 2024  5 
Abbreviations 
 
BAPM The British Association of Perinatal Medicine 
BG Blood glucose 
CHI Congenital Hyperinsulinism 
FfP Framework for Practice 
FGR Fetal growth restriction 
IUGR Intrauterine growth restriction 
IV intravenous 
LGA Large for gestational age 
NEWTT Newborn Early Warning Trigger and Track 
OFC Occipitofrontal circumference 
PCV Packed Cell Volume 
POCT Point of care testing 
 
  

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
 
   
© BAPM, 2024  6 
Executive Summary of Recommendations 
1. Full Term infants (born at or after 37+0 weeks’ gestation) at risk of hypoglycaemia and 
impaired metabolic adaptation (the process of transition from a constant transplacental 
energy supply in the form of glucose to a variable fuel supply from milk-feeding and 
utilization of adipose and glycogen stores) include infants of mothers with diabetes, infants 
whose mothers have taken beta-blockers, and infants with fetal growth restriction (FGR). 
FGR should be defined using gestational age and sex specific 2nd centile values (i.e. babies 
who are small for gestational age), and / or clinical wasting (e.g. >2 centiles discrepancy 
between occipital frontal circumference (OFC) and weight using age and sex normalised 
charts). 
2. Infants at risk of impaired metabolic adaptation and hypoglycaemia should be identified at 
birth and placed on a care pathway that includes early provision of energy, regular 
assessment of feeding and clinical condition, and blood glucose (BG) monitoring. 
3. Breast milk is the ideal source of energy during postnatal metabolic adaptation. Women 
should be supported to establish effective breastfeeding. 
4. Parents are partners in the care of infants at risk of impaired metabolic adaptation and 
hypoglycaemia. Parents should be given verbal and written information that describes why 
their baby is receiving extra support and BG monitoring; how to reduce the likelihood of 
hypoglycaemia; the signs that indicate when a baby is becoming unwell; and how to raise 
concerns about their baby's well-being or feeding pattern. A parent information sheet is 
provided (Appendix 1). 
5. Ward based blood gas analysers provide accurate and rapid measurement of neonatal BG 
concentration, which supports real-time clinical decision making. Many handheld glucose 
meters are not sufficiently accurate in the range of 0 - 2.0mmol/L. These should be used in 
consultation with and approval of the local point of care test (POCT) team. Further 
information on point of care testing (POCT) devices is given in Appendix 5. 
6. An operational threshold approach should be used to guide interventions intended to raise 
BG: 
• A value <1.0mmol/L at any time 
• A single value <2.5mmol/L in a neonate with abnormal clinical signs 
• More than two measurements <2.0mmol/L in a baby   with a risk factor for impaired 
metabolic adaptation and hypoglycaemia but without abnormal clinical signs 
7. Buccal administration of glucose 40% oral gel may be used in conjunction with a feeding 
plan when the BG is 1.0 to 1.9mmol/L. 
8. Severe (BG <1.0mmol/L) or persistent hypoglycaemia (>2 measurements < 2.0mmol/L in 
the first 48 hours after birth) requires urgent medical review and investigation. 
9. Practitioners need skills to distinguish between infants with abnormal feeding behaviours 
that can occur with other signs to suggest illness, and infants who are  well but reluctant 
to feed. A plan for supporting reluctant feeders and their mothers is  given in  Appendix 2, 
Flowchart D

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
 
   
© BAPM, 2024  7 
Introduction 
 
Background and purpose of the framework 
 
Hypoglycaemia is a leading cause of term admission to neonatal units. In 2016, NHS Improvement and 
British Association of Perinatal Medicine (BAPM) convened a working group to develop a Framework 
for Practice (FfP) to address variation in practices in the definition of hypoglycaemia1, the identification, 
management and admission thresholds2 of babies admitted to neonatal units for hypoglycaemia; and 
to promote safer practices that avoid unnecessary separation of mother and baby. 
 
In rare circumstances neonatal hypoglycaemia is sufficiently severe to cause brain injury and long-term 
neurodevelopmental impairment, with considerable costs to individuals, families, and the NHS3. 
Therefore, it is incumbent upon clinicians to implement practices that prevent harm that can result 
from unrecognised or untreated hypoglycaemia, whilst minimising unnecessary interventions and 
admissions to neonatal units. 
 
This document was revised from the 2017 version. The purpose of the revision was to update the 
framework to ensure alignment of recommended clinical practice with the most up-to-date scientific 
evidence.  
 
Target users 
 
All healthcare professionals involved in the care of infants born at term during the first 72 hours after 
birth. The framework should be delivered in partnership with parents. 
 
Target population 
 
Newborn full-term babies in the first 72 hours after birth during the period of metabolic transition. 
After 72 hours from birth babies should be managed as per local paediatric guidelines for the 
management of hypoglycaemia. Babies born preterm or who are unwell and receiving intensive care 
are excluded and should be managed according to relevant national and local neonatal guidelines. 
  

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
 
   
© BAPM, 2024  8 
Process 
 
The original Framework for Practice included recommendations based on: 
• Literature review including existing guidelines. 
• Data analysis of litigation themes. 
• Data analysis of admissions for hypoglycaemia. 
• National audit of practice including admission and thresholds for intervention. 
• Clinical experience.  
 
Members of the revision group met to discuss any necessary changes to key areas of practice 
concerning the identification and management of term neonates with hypoglycaemia. Members 
undertook an update to previous literature searches around specified topic areas. This included 
searches of Medline and PubMed 2016-2022. Further online meetings were held to discuss each area 
and agree updates or changes to practice points when new evidence was available. 
 
The group met to respond to comments raised during consultation and to agree the final version of the 
revised Framework. 
 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  9 
Framework for Practice Section A: Practice Points 
 
A synopsis of supporting evidence is given for each practice point in Section B. 
 
Identification of infants at risk of impaired metabolic adaptation and recognition of 
clinical signs 
 
1. The following groups are at risk of neurological sequelae of neonatal hypoglycaemia, and 
measures should be in place to identify them at birth for early milk / energy provision and 
monitoring of BG concentration*: 
• Fetal growth restriction: as indicated by birth weight <2nd centile (small for gestational, 
Table 1) or clinically wasted (e.g. >2 centiles discrepancy between occipital frontal 
circumference (OFC) and weight using age and sex normalised charts). 
• Infants of mothers with diabetes. 
• Infants of mothers taking beta-blockers in the third trimester and / or at time of birth . 
 
*Moderate to late preterm infants are at risk of hypoglycaemia. Energy provision and BG monitoring 
should be planned as part of the care pathway for this group of infants. Care of the moderate to late 
preterm infant in the postnatal ward setting is beyond the scope of this document and can be found 
within the BAPM Framework for Practice for early postnatal care of moderate to late preterm infants. 
 
Table 1. Second centile birth weights for boys and girls by week of gestation (from BAPM Newborn 
Early Warning Trigger and Track Framework for Practice4 ) 
 
Gestational age at birth 
(completed weeks) 
Birth weight (kilograms) 
Boys Girls 
37 2.10 2.00 
38 2.30 2.20 
39 2.50 2.45 
40 2.65 2.60 
41 2.80 2.75 
42 2.90 2.85 
 
2. Measurement of BG concentration should be performed for any infant who has one or more of 
the following diagnoses or clinical signs: 
• Perinatal acidosis (cord arterial or infant pH <7.1 and base deficit ≥ -12mmol/L) 
• Hypothermia (<36.5°C) not attributed to environmental factors 
• Suspected / confirmed early onset neonatal infection  
• Central cyanosis 
• Apnoea 
• Altered level of consciousness 
• Seizures 
• Hypotonia 
• Lethargy 
• High pitched cry 
• Abnormal feeding behaviour especially after a period of feeding well may be indicative of 
hypoglycaemia and should prompt a full clinical assessment and consideration of BG 
measurement. Use BAPM NEWTT2 chart BAPM Newborn Early Warning Trigger and Track 
Framework. 
 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  10 
 
Signs of abnormal feeding behaviour include: 
• Not waking for feeds: babies may only wake for feeds 3-5 times in the first 24 hours; after 
the first 24 hours babies should feed at least 8 times in 24 hours.  
• Very frequent feeding: Babies who breastfeed frequently without appearing satisfied, 
frequent breastfeeds where baby tires rapidly or stops feeding within the first five minutes.  
• Not sucking effectively: weak suck or inability to suck. 
Jitteriness, defined as excessive repetitive movements of one or more limbs, which are unprovoked and 
not in response to a stimulus, is common and is not by itself an indication to  measure BG. 
 
Devices for accurate measurement of blood glucose in the newborn 
 
3. Accurate measurement of BG level is essential for diagnosis and management       of neonatal 
hypoglycaemia. Any device used for the measurement of glucose, whether glucose meter or 
Blood gas machine should be used with the advice and support of pathology Healthcare 
Scientists, to ensure it is fit for purpose. The quality of results produced by POCT devices on 
patients, and specifically newborns, must be understood and evidenced prior to the purchase 
of equipment. 
4. All operators of POCT glucose devices should have training on the device which includes pre-
analytical sample requirements, quality monitoring of the device, limitations of the device and 
instructions on how to record the results to ensure a full audit trail. The training content is 
best constructed with collaboration between the manufacturer, the neonatal education team 
and Pathology Healthcare scientists. Please see Appendix 5: Point of Care testing for blood 
glucose in newborn babies for further information. 
5. The limitations of any POCT device should be covered in the training on the device. 
Technology is advancing rapidly, and assumptions should not be made on the technical 
performance of a device based on historical generalities for example the performance of 
glucose meters on samples with high packed cell volume is variable. 
6. Samples should be taken from a warm well-perfused heel by heel-prick, or from a free flowing 
venous / arterial sample, using local guidelines for skin asepsis and patient comfort. Air 
bubbles in capillary tubes should be avoided. Abnormal lipid or protein content in samples 
may reduce the accuracy of all glucose results. Do not aspirate the sample from a catheter 
that has had a dextrose infusion running through it. 
 
Management of infants identified to be at risk of impaired metabolic adaptation: 
general care, feeding support, energy provision and blood glucose monitoring 
 
7. Provide parents with verbal and written information that explains why their baby is receiving 
extra support and BG monitoring; how the likelihood of hypoglycaemia can be minimised; the 
signs that could indicate that baby is becoming unwell; and how to raise concerns about their 
baby's well-being or feeding pattern to staff. An example parent information sheet is provided 
in Appendix 1. This information may be communicated during the antenatal period or during 
labour if the risk factors listed in Practice Point 1 are known. 
8. Immediately after birth, dry the baby and put a hat on. Place baby in skin-to-skin contact with 
the mother to provide warmth and to facilitate the initiation of feeding. Ensure that ambient 
temperature is warm, the room is free from draughts, show the mother safe positioning of the 
baby, and commence observations using the BAPM Newborn Early Warning Trigger and Track 
Framework (NEWTT2). Note that NEWTT2 classes BG 2.0 to 2.5mmol/L with a yellow trigger 
and suggests repeating a set of observations in 1 hour excluding glucose. A repeat glucose 
measurement is indicated only if recommended by the hypoglycaemia guidance. Begin care 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  11 
pathway in Flowchart A. 
9. Ensure that baby is offered the breast within the first 60 minutes and assess the need for 
helping the mother with: 
1. breastfeeding support 
2. recognition of early feeding cues (rapid eye movements under the eye lids, mouth and 
tongue movements, body movements and sounds, sucking on a fist) 
3. signs of effective attachment. 
10. Assess and document feeding cues and feeding effectiveness at each feed. Use a tool such as the 
UNICEF UK Baby Friendly breastfeeding assessment5. 
11. Offer the breast in response to feeding cues  but with intervals of no longer than three hours 
from the beginning of the last feed, until BG measurements have been above  2.0mmol/L on 
two consecutive occasions. Continue feeding support until mother and  midwife are satisfied 
that effective feeding is established. 
12. If the baby is not showing signs of effective feeding, encourage continuous safe skin-to-skin 
contact and show and support the mother to hand express. Any colostrum expressed should 
be fed to the baby immediately, using a method that is best suited to the infant’s capabilities 
and parent’s preferences and consistent with local policy. Continue to support mother to 
express at least 8-10 times per 24-hour period until baby is feeding effectively and provide 
active feeding support until breastfeeding is established. If no colostrum is available and, after 
discussion with the mother, consider supplementing with infant formula. Formula will be 
required in larger volumes than colostrum as it is possible that the baby’s ability to utilize 
ketone bodies may be limited by the use of infant formula (40 to 60ml/kg/per day during the 
first 24 hours; 70 to 90 ml/kg/per day 24-48 hours; 100-120 ml/kg/per day 48 to 72 hours; 
until colostrum/breastmilk is available). If infant formula is introduced,  support the mother to 
resume breast milk feeds as soon as possible. For the period the mother is expressing she 
should see increasing volumes of colostrum/ milk expressed day by day. Using a breast pump 
alongside hand expressing may be helpful. 
13.  There is a lack of evidence regarding the use of donor breastmilk as part of a hypoglycaemia 
pathway in the term population hence no recommendation is made. 
14. For women who choose to formula feed, offer a feed within the first hour after birth at a 
volume of 40 to 60 ml/kg/day for the first 24 hours. Implement modified responsive paced 
feeding by ensuring intervals of no more than three hours from the beginning of one feed to 
the next. Depending on BG measurement, increase the volume of infant formula if necessary. 
It is possible that the baby’s ability to utilize ketone bodies may be limited by the use of infant 
formula milk.  Feeds should be increased with age to 70 to 90 ml/kg/per day at 24 to 48 hours; 
100 to 120 ml/kg/per day 48 to 72 hours.  Feed responsively when BG measurements have 
been above 2.0mmol/L on two consecutive occasions. If the baby does not show feeding cues, 
i.e., is a reluctant feeder and has no signs of illness, refer to Practice Points 26 and 27. 
15. Measure the BG level before the second feed (2 to 4 hours after birth). If the baby shows 
feeding cues before 2 hours do not restrict feeding and allow baby to feed. Measure BG 
immediately if there are clinical signs suggestive of hypoglycaemia (Practice Point 2). Note: 
babies who feed for very long periods or have long periods of lots of shorter feeds may not 
have accurate pre-feed BG and may require more prolonged monitoring.  
16. Based on the result of the first BG measurement, continue to: 
• Flowchart A, if BG >2.0mmol/L 
• Flowchart B, if first pre-feed BG is 1.0 to 1.9mmol/L, and no abnormal signs  
• Flowchart C if first pre-feed BG <1.0mmol/L, and / or clinical signs consistent with 
hypoglycaemia at higher BG concentration. 
17.  All infants at risk of hypoglycaemia including infants of mothers with diabetes, should remain 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  12 
in hospital for a minimum of 24 hours16 . Additionally, they should remain in hospital until two 
consecutive BG measurements are >2.0mmol/L and the mother and staff are satisfied that 
effective feeding has been established and maintained over several fast-feed cycles.  Note: 
babies who feed for very long periods or have long periods of lots of shorter feeds may not 
have accurate pre-feed BG and may require more prolonged monitoring. 
 
Consideration of special treatments 
 
18. Infants being managed using the pathway in Flowchart A are fed within the first 60 minutes 
and must have a BG level measured prior to the second feed. If the first BG is 1.0 to 
1.9mmol/L or there is a subsequent BG measurement <2.0mmol/L, glucose 40% oral gel 
(200mg/kg) may be given alongside feeding support (Flowchart B, Appendix 3). 
19. If BG is <1.0mmol/L, arrange for urgent medical review which will include siting an 
intravenous (IV) cannula for treatment with IV glucose. If there is a delay in obtaining IV 
access, consider either glucose 40% oral gel (200mg/kg) (appendix 3) or IM glucagon 
(200micrograms/kg, maximum 1mg as a single dose). 
20. If BG is <1.0mmol/L, glucose 40% oral gel should only be used as an interim measure while 
arranging for treatment with IV glucose. 
 
Investigations for hypoglycaemia 
 
21. A newborn with persistent (more than 2 BG measurements <2.0mmol/L within the 72 hours of 
birth) or severe hypoglycaemia (<1.0mmol/L at any time), and infants with signs of acute 
neurological dysfunction and BG <2.5mmol/L should be referred urgently to a paediatrician / 
neonatal team for investigation.    
Blood samples for the following investigations should be taken before hypoglycaemia is 
treated. However, do not delay the treatment to complete investigations and prioritise those 
marked “*” 
• Glucose* 
• Insulin and C-peptide* 
• Free fatty acids* 
• Beta-hydroxy butyrate (or point of care blood ketones, if available) * 
• Consider investigations for early onset neonatal infection  
• Cortisol  
• Growth hormone  
• Acylcarnitine profile 
• Amino acids 
• Ammonia  
• Lactate  
 
Urine sample for: 
• Ketones 
• Organic acids 
 
Investigations marked * should be prioritised and treatment of hypoglycaemia should not be 
delayed if insufficient blood is obtained for the remaining investigations which should then be 
taken as soon as possible. Consider having local pre-prepared “hypoglycaemia investigation” 
packs available to send the investigations. Add information on BG levels in the investigations 
request forms to facilitate appropriate reporting of results.  Further investigations should be 
based on the results of the initial screen and taken following specialist advice. 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  13 
 
The Framework does not recommend BG measurement within 1-2 hours of birth. If a BG is 
measured for a non-indicated reason, e.g., as part of a blood gas read-out and is low, then the 
clinical team should be alerted to make an urgent assessment about treatment and further 
testing. Infants with severe hypoglycaemia or abnormal neurological signs should be admitted 
to the neonatal unit for neurocritical care, investigations, and monitoring.  
22. Transient hypoglycaemia defined as one or two measurements of 1.0-1.9mmol/L within the 
first 72 hours after birth in an infant with no abnormal signs who is feeding effectively does 
not require the investigations listed in Practice Point 21. 
 
Persistent low blood glucose measurement 
 
23. Persistent hypoglycaemia (more than two measurements <2.0mmol/L within the first 72 
hours after birth) can be the first sign of hyperinsulinism or another metabolic disorder 
characterized by neonatal hypoglycaemia. It is important to refer to a paediatrician and screen 
such infants (see Practice Point 21 for list) to identify hyperinsulinism or another disorder that 
requires specific therapy. 
24. Hyperinsulinism should be considered if BG concentration remains low (<2.0mmol/L on >2 
occasions in first 72 hours despite adequate energy provision and a feeding plan), or if a 
glucose dose greater than 8mg/kg/min is required. Check blood insulin to C-peptide molar 
ratio to exclude the possibility of exogenous insulin administration.  
25. In cases of suspected or confirmed hyperinsulinism, aim to maintain BG concentration 
>3.0mmol/L in the first 48 hours and >3.5mmol/L after 48 hours from birth. Liaise with 
specialists as soon as possible. Whilst awaiting specialist input take into consideration that 
metabolic transition occurs over several days; healthy babies have BG levels which increase 
over the first 18 hours and remain stable to 48 hours before increasing to values normal for 
the paediatric population by day 4 when they will have completed their metabolic transition61. 
This document is aimed at babies from birth to 72 hours only, after which local guidance on 
the management of babies and children with hypoglycaemia should be followed (pending 
specialist input). 
 
Management of the reluctant feeder with no risk factors for impaired adaptation 
 
26. A thorough clinical assessment should be made and documented within six hours after birth, 
at which time practitioners should differentiate between a well-baby who is reluctant to feed 
versus a baby whose feeding pattern suggests an abnormal clinical state due to illness. Signs 
of reluctant feeding include not waking for feeds, not latching at the breast, not sucking 
effectively, and appearing unsettled. Skin-to-skin contact and laid-back nursing will stimulate 
the baby to use innate abilities and help the mother recognize feeding cues. Feeding support 
should be provided to reluctant feeders using Flowchart D and Appendix 2, and medical 
review should be prompt if there are concerns that feeding behaviours may reflect an 
abnormal clinical state. 
27. BG should be measured if reluctant / non-effective feeding follows a period of  effective 
feeding or if there are any abnormal clinical signs in addition to reluctant feeding.

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  14 
Framework for Practice Section B: Synopsis of supporting evidence 
 
Identification of infants at risk of impaired metabolic transition and recognition of 
clinical signs clinical signs: Practice Points 1 and 2. 
 
Infants with fetal growth restriction (FGR) are at risk of hypoglycaemia due to low glycogen stores, 
increased peripheral insulin sensitivity, impaired gluconeogenesis due to a poorly coordinated response 
to hypoglycaemia by counter-regulatory hormones, and increased insulin secretion6-13. 
 
Pragmatically, FGR should be defined as birth weight ≤2nd centile using the gestation and sex specific 
values listed in Table 1. Use of an arbitrary weight threshold (e.g., 2.5kg) fails to detect growth 
restriction in infants born at >40 weeks’ gestation, and this practice was identified as a contributory 
factor in litigation. Be aware that FGR can manifest as low subcutaneous fat stores (so called ‘wasted’ 
or ‘scrawny’ appearance) despite birth weight above 2nd centile. At present there is insufficient 
evidence to recommend the use of customised growth charts for detection of infants at risk of 
hypoglycaemia14, 15, and clinical assessment of FGR at birth remains important3. 
 
Diabetes is the most common medical disorder of pregnancy in the UK, affecting 2-5% of pregnancies16. 
Infants of mothers with diabetes are at increased risk of hypoglycaemia due to transient 
hyperinsulinism17; the risk is reduced but not completely ameliorated by good glycaemic control18,19. 
Therefore, all infants of mothers with diabetes, irrespective of the type of diabetes, should be 
monitored for hypoglycaemia16. 
 
Exposure to beta-blockers used to treat maternal disease is associated with hypoglycaemia due to 
transplacental transfer of drug and interruption of glycogenolysis in the offspring10, 20. 
 
The clinical signs associated with hypoglycaemia are non-specific so BG measurement should be 
undertaken in any infant who presents with one or more of the abnormal signs listed in Practice Point 
221,22. 
 
BG should be monitored in infants with diseases associated with:  
• Low energy availability, e.g. moderate to severe perinatal hypoxia-ischaemia. 
• Impaired hormone / enzyme responses, e.g. moderate to severe perinatal hypoxia-ischaemia, 
clinically suspected or confirmed early onset neonatal infection (but not babies who have 
undergone infection screens for risk factors only), pituitary / adrenal insufficiency, inborn 
errors of metabolism. 
• Hyperinsulinism, e.g. congenital hyperinsulinism, Beckwith- Wiedemann syndrome. 
 
It is controversial whether infants who are large-for-gestational age (LGA, birth weight >90th 
centile) are at risk of hypoglycaemia. Data from a registry and a case series have been interpreted by 
some to suggest that LGA is a risk factor for hypoglycaemia23,24 but features of study design including 
retrospective data collection, inconsistent measurement devices, variations in timing of sampling, and 
limited clinical phenotyping of study groups, leave doubt about causation. The working group considers 
that if there is no evidence of maternal diabetes and the baby does not have features suggestive of 
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, then routine screening of LGA infants for hypoglycaemia is not 
indicated. 
 
Occasionally, it will be appropriate to screen infants based on history of first degree relative with a 
heritable disorder associated with neonatal hypoglycaemia. Where possible, this should be planned 
before birth so that parents and staff are prepared. 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  15 
 
 
Devices for accurate measurement of blood glucose in the newborn: Practice Points 
3-6 
 
POCT blood gas analysers should be considered the reference standard for measuring blood glucose 
based on accuracy and speed of result availability. Blood gas analysers produce glucose results as a 
calculated ‘plasma glucose equivalent’ concentration that should agree with laboratory plasma glucose 
results in the majority of cases25, and they have the advantage of accessibility and speed in most 
maternity and newborn facilities. Blood gas analysers may be configured to give a ‘glucose only’ reading 
on a small sample. 
 
Central laboratory measurement of glucose from samples sent in fluoride oxalate tubes is inconsistent 
due to variable inhibition of glycolysis in the first 30 to 90 minutes, and variability in time taken to 
reach the laboratory for processing. Processing time may lead to impractical delays in obtaining results 
and guiding clinical management. 
 
Some cot side technology or handheld glucose meters are still prone to significant limitations especially 
in the range of 0-2.0mmol/L26-28. The International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) standard 
15197:2013 was implemented on 1st June 2016. Although the ISO standard is not intended to apply to 
BG meters for professional use, it is the only standard available and is therefore used as a benchmark 
for performance by glucose meter manufacturers and their products are awarded  CE marks based 
upon compliance with the standard. The standard specifies that 95% of the measured glucose values 
shall fall within +/-0.83mmol/L of the average measured values of the reference measurement 
procedure at glucose concentrations <5.55mmol/L. Although handheld glucose meters are available 
that meet the ISO standard the user must understand the limits of their accuracy. 
 
In centres where handheld devices are used to screen for low BG, please refer to Appendix 5: Point of 
Care testing for blood glucose in newborn babies for further information on understanding how POCTs 
perform in newborn infants. 
 
Glucose biosensors, which might permit non-invasive and accurate continuous measurement of 
transdermal glucose, are currently under development with the potential for enormous impact29. It is 
essential that blood samples are collected in an optimal manner that includes skin asepsis, measures 
for patient comfort according to local policy, and that samples are taken from a warm well-perfused 
heel (or venous / arterial blood). Avoid air bubbles if collecting in a capillary tube. 
 
In summary, analysis of plasma glucose equivalent using a blood gas machine provides a rapid and 
accurate measurement of neonatal BG to support real-time clinical decisions. Consideration should be 
given to providing access to this ward-based technology in all clinical settings where newborn infants 
are looked after. See Appendix 5: Point of Care testing for blood glucose in newborn babies. 
 
Management of infants identified to be at risk: general care, feeding support, 
energy provision and blood glucose monitoring: Practice Points 7-16 
 
The principles of management for antenatal or immediate postpartum identification of infants at risk of 
impaired metabolic adaptation are thermal care, early energy provision and feeding support, 
monitoring of BG concentration with an accurate device that provides results in real time, and 
listening and responding to parents’ views about infant feeding and well-being.3,22, 30, 31 
 
Be aware that maternal obesity is associated with lower breastfeeding rates, which may be mediated in 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  16 
part by impaired lactogenesis32-34. These women may require additional support to establish 
breastfeeding successfully. 
 
Cold stress is associated with hypoglycaemia and should be avoided by looking after mother and baby 
in a warm environment free from drafts with safe skin-to-skin contact, and placement of a hat31. 
 
There should be regular assessment of the baby when awake, including colour, tone, respiratory rate, 
heart rate, temperature, level of consciousness, and signs associated with hypoglycaemia (listed in 
Practice Point 2). This should include assessment of feeding behaviours, which may be a presenting 
sign of significant hypoglycaemia3. Thorough clinical assessment cannot be made effectively during 
sleep. The BAPM NEWTT2 chart is recommended for documenting clinical information4. 
 
If a baby has abnormal clinical signs suggestive of hypoglycaemia, BG should be measured immediately 
and urgent review by a paediatrician or advanced neonatal nurse practitioner should be sought. 
The aim should be to ensure that needs are met as far as possible by breastfeeding, or by  the use of 
expressed colostrum / breast milk (EBM) because exclusive breastfeeding optimises health outcomes 
for mother and infant.35 Breast milk feeds may optimize the metabolic adaptation by improving 
availability of alternative cerebral fuels , 36,37 and type of milk feed has modifying effects on the 
pioneering micro biota 38, 39  which may have implications for life long immune and metabolic 
health40-42. If the baby is unable to breastfeed effectively, the mother should be encouraged to express 
her milk to feed colostrum to her baby and to maximise future lactation. For mothers who intend to 
formula feed, the aim should be to ensure frequent, effective feeding. Exclusive infant formula feeding 
has been associated with lower availability of alternative cerebral fuel. Babies will therefore require 
larger volumes of formula than breastmilk: 40 to 60ml/kg/per day during the first 24 hours, increasing 
volumes if required; 70 to 90ml/kg/per day 24 to 48 hours; 100 to 120 ml/kg/per day 48 to 72 hours. 
 
T
he optimal time to measure BG concentration is just prior to the second feed10, 22. In practice, for the 
infant who is well, this will be within four hours of birth. If the infant is not showing any feeding cues 
within four hours, then this should be considered a sign of possible hypoglycaemia and should prompt 
BG measurement. 
 
There is no evidence to support routine supplementation of feeds with energy supplements43,44. The 
hPOD trial concluded there is no evidence for the use of prophylactic dextrose gel for babies at risk of 
hypoglycaemia to prevent neonatal unit admission or treatment for hypoglycaemia45. 
 
The Diabetes and Antenatal Milk Expression (DAME) trial concluded that there is no harm in women 
with diabetes with an otherwise low risk pregnancy, expressing colostrum from 36 weeks’ gestation. 
Babies in the trial were more likely to receive only breast milk during their hospital stay, however, there 
was no reduction in hypoglycaemia or neonatal unit admission with hypoglycaemia46, 47.  
 
All infants at risk of hypoglycaemia including infants of mothers with diabetes, should remain in 
hospital for a minimum of 24 hours16. They should remain in hospital until two consecutive BG 
measurements are >2.0mmol/L and the mother and staff are satisfied that effective feeding has been 
established and maintained over several fast-feed cycles.  
 
Thresholds for intervention 
 
The level of BG concentration that leads to cerebral injury in newborns and adverse 
neurodevelopmental outcome is unknown48. Although attempts have been made to identify a single 
‘safe’ BG value49-51, studies have been confounded by inclusion of infants with independent risk factors 
for adverse neurodevelopmental outcome such as perinatal asphyxia, have not taken account of 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  17 
different risk profiles for impaired metabolic transition, have seldom documented duration of 
hypoglycaemia, have been uncontrolled, and follow-up has not been sufficiently long and complete. 
There is some consensus based on the literature that BG levels below 1.0mmol/L that are persistent 
beyond 1 to 2 hours (or are recurrent) and are associated with acute neurological dysfunction present 
the greatest risk for cerebral injury, and that brief episodes of hypoglycaemia in the absence of acute 
neurological dysfunction or an associated disorder are less likely to lead to cerebral injury and poor 
outcome52. 
 
A detailed description of the metabolic transition from fetal to neonatal life is beyond the scope of this 
document and is reviewed elsewhere10,53. In summary, the fetal brain is exposed to glucose 
concentrations that are around 0.5mmol/L lower than those of maternal plasma54. The lower limit of 
fetal glucose concentration is around 3.0mmol/L55. Following separation from the placental 
circulation there is a physiological decline in BG concentration to a nadir at 1 to 2 hours, and in healthy 
neonates levels begin to increase 2 to 3 hours after birth, largely driven by endogenous glucose 
production rather than by feeding. Levels that are typical of infants, children and adults (3.5 to 
5.5mmol/L) are not reached until 3 to 4 days after birth56-61. The GLOW study results showed that the 
period of postnatal hypoglycemia in the cohort of mostly breast-fed babies resolved by day 4 from 
birth.61 It is not unusual for healthy, breast fed newborn infants to have BG values of less than 2mmol/L 
in the first 24 hours after birth36, 59, 60, without apparent adverse consequence, and in a well-
phenotyped group of infants (35 to 42 weeks’ gestational age) with risk factors for hypoglycaemia, 
concentrations <2.6mmol/L and <2.0mmol/L occurred in 51% and 19% respectively, but very few had 
abnormal clinical signs62. 
 
Given the uncertainties of defining a ‘safe’ lower limit of BG and the need to take account of 
differences in availability and mobilisation of alternative cerebral fuels between patient groups, an 
‘operational threshold’ approach to the management of neonates with hypoglycaemia was developed 
by expert consensus in 200030. This defines “the concentration of plasma or whole BG at which 
clinicians should intervene based on evidence currently available in the literature.” In this model, 
infants at risk of impaired metabolic adaptation and neurological sequelae from hypoglycaemia are 
identified, and interventions to raise the BG are recommended at specified thresholds. There are two 
caveats: first, acute neurological dysfunction in association with low BG at any level should prompt 
urgent investigation and treatment; and second, there are special circumstances such as 
hyperinsulinism and perinatal asphyxia when the threshold should be raised. 
 
The operational threshold model has been adopted widely, but controversy remains about threshold 
values for diagnosis and intervention. For example, the 2011 American Academy of Pediatrics 
guidance recommends screening high risk infants (defined as late preterm [34 to 36 weeks’ gestation], 
SGA, infants of mothers with diabetes and LGA) 30 minutes after the first feed and intervene with feed 
or IV glucose for values 25 to 40mg/dl (1.4 to 2.2mmol/L). The threshold range for intervention 
increases to 35 to 45mg/dl (1.9 to 2.5mmol/L) between 4 and 24 hours after birth. Once hypoglycaemia 
has been diagnosed the guideline recommends targeting glucose concentrations > 45mg/dl 
(2.5mmol/L)63. The 2015 Pediatric Endocrine Society guideline recommends that in the first 48 hours 
after birth, the target BG concentration should be 50mg/dl (2.8mmol/L), stating that “neurogenic and 
neuroglycopenic symptoms usually occur when the plasma glucose concentration decreases to 50 to 
70mg/dl (2.8 to 3.9 mmol/L)”64. We did not find evidence to support this statement for healthy 
neonates born at term.  
 
The variation in recommended thresholds in published guidance is reflected in practice in English 
Neonatal Units, which define hypoglycaemia between 2.0 and 4.0mmol/L2.  
 
The HypoEXIT study65, a multicentre randomized noninferiority trial of healthy asymptomatic babies at 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  18 
risk of hypoglycaemia, compared threshold values for hypoglycaemia of 2.0 and 2.6mmol/L, and 
reported neurodevelopmental outcome at 18 months. They concluded the lower threshold was 
noninferior to the higher threshold in terms of cognitive and motor development at 18 months of age. 
Although there were fewer severe hypoglycaemic episodes in the higher threshold group, they also 
received more treatment interventions, but duration of hospital stay was similar. 
 
The Children with Hypoglycaemia and Their Later Development (CHYLD) study group reported 2-year 
outcomes of infants born at 35 weeks or more with risk factors for hypoglycaemia defined as maternal 
diabetes, birth at <37 weeks, and birth weight that was low (<10th percentile or <2500 g) or high (>90th 
percentile or >4500 g). Hypoglycaemia was defined as <2.6mmol/L, and according to this definition 
over half of participants experienced hypoglycaemia. A treatment strategy was in place to maintain 
BG >2.6mmol/L.   The study66 reports the following important observations about at-risk infants who 
receive treatment aimed at targeting BG of at least 2.6mmol/L. The first is that hypoglycaemia was not 
associated with an increased risk of neurosensory impairment (RR 0.95, 95% CI 0.75-1.20, p=0.67) or 
processing difficulty, defined as an executive-function score or motion coherence threshold that was 
more than 1.5 SD from the mean (RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.56-1.51, p=0.74). The second is that the mean 
difference in BG concentration between those who did and those who did not have a poor outcome 
was only 0.16mmol/L. These observations raise the possibility that adverse outcomes that were 
prevalent in this study group may be a function of the underlying risk profile rather than BG 
concentration per se. A follow-up study at 4.5 years reported that neonatal hypoglycaemia was not 
associated with increased risk of neurosensory impairment although among secondary outcomes it was 
associated with increased risk of poor executive function and visual motor function in children who had 
experienced lower BG concentrations67. 
 
In summary, no study has shown that treatment of asymptomatic hypoglycaemia in ‘at risk’ groups 
improves neurodevelopmental outcome, and no randomised trial comparing different treatment 
thresholds with sufficiently long and complete follow-up has been carried out. In the absence of 
these forms of evidence the group considered that there is no new argument to support a change in 
the operational threshold approach proposed by Cornblath et al in 200030 , reviewed on several 
occasions since48, 51,52 
1. A value <1.0mmol/L at anytime. 
2. Baby with abnormal clinical signs: single value <2.5mmol/L. 
3. Baby at risk of impaired metabolic adaptation but without abnormal clinical signs:  
<2.0mmol/L and remaining <2.0mmol/L at next measurement. 
 
In infants who have suspected hyperinsulinism, investigations (if not already done) should be 
performed if the BG is <3.0mmol/L. The treatment threshold should be 3.0mmol/L in neonates with 
suspected hyperinsulinism in the first 48 hours after birth and 3.5mmol/L after 72 hours of age68, 69. The 
operational threshold should be increased to at least 2.5mmol/L in infants with moderate-severe 
hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy (for review see70). Higher BG concentration may confer benefit in 
this patient group, however hyperglycaemia is also harmful and should be avoided71-73. 
 
Consideration of special treatments: Practice Points 17-19 
 
Treatment with glucose 40% oral gel (dextrose gel) by buccal administration is a simple and safe 
treatment for initial care of infants with low BG74. Buccal glucose gel can be used as first-line treatment 
to manage hypoglycaemia in late preterm and term babies in the first 48 hours after birth, enabling 
babies to remain with their mothers, avoid NICU admission and increase likelihood of breastfeeding 
after discharge. It is important to use glucose gel in conjunction with an infant feeding plan to enable 
establishment of oral feeds. Buccal glucose gel can be a useful adjunct to Baby Friendly approaches for 
managing low BG soon after birth75. 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  19 
 
The use of glucose 40% oral gel in neonates is not new, it was recommended over 20 years ago76, but a 
previous randomised trial that was designed to assess intermittent BG concentrations did not show 
differences between gel and placebo77. More recently the ‘Sugar Babies’ trial assessed whether 
treatment with dextrose gel was more effective than feeding alone for reversal of neonatal 
hypoglycaemia in at-risk babies78. This study showed that infants randomised to dextrose gel (glucose 
40% oral gel) had significantly less treatment failure, defined as glucose <2.6mmol/L after two 
treatment attempts with dextrose gel versus placebo (relative risk 0.57, 95% CI 0.33 – 0.98). Treatment 
with dextrose gel also lowered rates of neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission for 
hypoglycaemia compared with placebo (16 [14%] vs 30 [25%]), with a number needed to treat of 8. In 
addition, fewer infants were formula feeding at 2 weeks of age in the dextrose gel group compared 
with placebo group (5 [4%] vs 15 [13%]). Despite treatment with dextrose gel 12% of infants treated 
had at least one rebound episode of hypoglycaemia (within 6 hours), and 24% had at least one 
recurrent episode of hypoglycaemia (within 48 hours of birth). So, although the gel decreased the need, 
it did not completely eliminate the use of intravenous dextrose. 
 
Finally, a two-year follow-up study of the ‘Sugar Babies’ trial reported that rates of neurosensory 
impairment, processing difficulties, and multiple secondary growth and developmental outcomes were 
equivalent between the dextrose gel and placebo groups79. 
 
Although rebound hypoglycaemia and recurrent hypoglycaemia were similar between groups in the 
original study and there was reassuring continuous glucose monitoring sensor data, a theoretical 
concern remained that the dextrose gel treatment might have delayed definitive treatment with 
intravenous dextrose and adversely impacted long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes. The 2-year 
follow-up data is reassuring that the early benefits seen with dextrose gel do not come at a cost of 
worse neurodevelopmental outcomes at two years of age. However, dextrose gel treatment was 
targeted to infants at-risk for hypoglycaemia who were otherwise asymptomatic, therefore the results 
do not apply to infants with symptomatic, severe, prolonged, or recurrent hypoglycaemia (i.e. the 
infant with severe hyperinsulinism), and should not be used in these circumstances except as an 
emergency measure if there is a delay in gaining IV access and IM glucagon is unavailable. 
 
In a dose finding study, glucose 40% oral gel given at one hour after birth to neonates with risk 
factors for hypoglycaemia reduced the number of infants with BG less than 2.6mmol/L during the 
following 48 hours with a number needed to treat of 10, but 95% confidence intervals were wide (5 - 
115) and the study was not designed to evaluate the effect of prophylaxis on clinical outcomes80.  A 
randomised trial of prophylactic oral glucose 40% oral gel for prevention of neonatal hypoglycaemia did 
not show a benefit in terms of either preventing NICU admission or reducing treatment for 
hypoglycaemia81. The working group does not recommend use of prophylactic glucose 40% oral gel. 
 
Investigations for hypoglycaemia: Practice Points 20-21 
 
Transient hypoglycaemia (BG 1.0 to 1.9mmol/L observed on one or two occasions over the first 48 
hours after birth), in the absence of abnormal clinical signs, does not require additional investigations20. 
 
A newborn with persistent (BG 1.0 to 1.9mmol/L on >2 occasions) or severe hypoglycaemia 
(<1.0mmol/L on one occasion) should have investigations listed in Practice Point 20 to look for the 
cause during the period of hypoglycaemia22,82. The results of these investigations and the possible need 
for additional tests should be discussed with a specialist in paediatric metabolic medicine and / or 
paediatric endocrinology. 
 
Infants with abnormal neurological signs and hypoglycaemia should have neurocritical care monitoring 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  20 
in a neonatal unit83, and brain MRI with long-term follow-up is recommended because of the risk of 
brain tissue injury and neurodevelopmental impairment in this group84. 
 
 
Persistent or recurrent low blood glucose measurement: Practice Points 22-24 
 
Persistent or recurrent hypoglycaemia (>2 measurements 1.0 to 1.9mmol/L during the first 48 hours 
after birth) can be the first presentation of an underlying disorder of glucose metabolism82,85. Early 
detection of this group of infants is important because specific interventions designed to reduce the 
risk of brain injury may be required68. 
 
Detailed clinical assessment and screening investigations should be performed urgently. 
Congenital Hyperinsulinism (CHI) is one of the most frequent causes of persistent or recurrent low BG. 
It is a heterogeneous condition caused by dysregulation of insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells. 
If CHI is suspected, diagnosis should be made promptly by confirming high plasma insulin levels and BG 
levels should be maintained >3.0mmol/L during the first 48 hours; increasing to an operational 
threshold of 3.5mmol/L from 48 hours68. Treatment should be initiated before results from other 
components of the screening tests (Practice Point 20) have been processed. 
 
Although most infants with CHI have no other abnormal clinical signs, CHI and other conditions 
associated with neonatal hypoglycaemia may be recognisable syndromes so careful clinical assessment 
can be informative for guiding subsequent tests86-89. Some of the more common are: 
• Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome. 
• Turners syndrome. 
• Costello syndrome. 
• Kabuki syndrome. 
 
Non-syndromic genetic disorders of congenital CHI68 and other rare disorders that cause persistent 
hypoglycaemia may require specific long-term treatment and management. These include metabolic 
disorders of glycogen storage, fatty acid oxidation and gluconeogenesis, hypopituitarism and adrenal 
insufficiency leading to deficiencies in growth hormone and cortisol9. Sometimes there may be 
diagnostic clues such as features of Prader-Willi syndrome90, hyperpigmentation  of the skin suggesting 
the diagnosis of familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD)91, or midline defects, undescended testes or 
micropenis in hypopituitarism, but typically no other signs are present and extensive laboratory 
evaluation is required, guided by specialist advice. 
 
In summary, the approach to babies with persistent or recurrent low BG is: early detection by ensuring 
relevant appropriate screening investigations are collected; admit to neonatal unit to ensure that 
management with adequate energy provision; keep BG > 3.0mmol/L in the first 48 hours after birth 
until insulin levels are known; and seek early specialist advice about additional investigations and 
management. 
 
Parent information: why baby is being monitored, how to tell if your baby may be 
unwell, and how to escalate concern (Practice Point 25, appendix 1) 
 
To empower parents of babies at risk of hypoglycaemia to serve as informed partners in their baby’s 
care, they should be provided with information that explains why their baby is being monitored, how to 
assess their baby’s general condition, and how to assess feeding cues and effective feeding. Parents 
should be provided with a clear method for escalating concerns to the healthcare team92. A recurrent 
theme in litigation cases concerning neonatal hypoglycaemia is failure of the healthcare team to record 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  21 
and take heed of maternal concerns about infant well-being3. The working group endorses the 
recommendation from the paper that "maternal concerns should not be discounted and should be 
followed by a detailed and documented history and assessment of the baby’s condition." 
See Appendix 1 for suggested parent information sheet. 
 
Management of the reluctant feeder with no risk factors for impaired transition: 
Practice Points 26-27 
 
We recommend pro-active support of feeding in the immediate post-partum period for all term 
infants31. This should be followed by an assessment within 6 hours to identify whether initiation of 
feeding has been effective, or whether the infant is a reluctant feeder (does not show feeding cues). 
Practitioners need to be skilled in the clinical assessment of effective feeding and reluctant feeding and 
be able to interpret feeding behaviour in the context of a general assessment of well-being. Infants 
with no risk factors (Practice Point 2) and no abnormal clinical signs but who are reluctant to feed 
should be given an active feeding plan (Appendix 2). 
 
Infants who are not feeding effectively, especially after a period of effective feeding, or have one or 
more abnormal clinical signs should have BG measured. 
 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  22 
Appendix 1. Parent Information Sheet: Protecting your baby from low 
blood glucose 
 
What is low blood glucose? 
 
You have been given this leaflet because your baby is at increased risk of having low blood    glucose (also 
called low blood sugar or hypoglycaemia). 
 
Babies who are small, premature, unwell at birth, or whose mothers have diabetes or have taken 
certain medication (beta-blockers), may have low blood glucose in the first few hours and days after 
birth, and it is especially important for these babies to keep warm and feed as often as possible to 
maintain normal blood glucose levels. 
 
If your baby is in one of these ‘at risk’ groups, it is recommended that they have some blood tests to 
check their blood glucose level. Extremely low blood glucose, if not treated, can cause brain injury 
resulting in developmental problems. If low blood glucose is identified quickly, it can be treated to 
avoid harm to your baby. 
 
Blood glucose testing 
 
Your baby’s blood glucose is tested by a heel-prick blood test. A very small amount of blood is needed, 
and it can be taken with your baby in skin-to-skin contact. The first blood test should be done before 
the second feed (2-4 hours after birth) and repeated until the blood glucose levels are stable. 
You and your baby will need to stay in hospital for the blood tests.  You will know the result of the test 
straight away. 
 
How to avoid low blood glucose 
 
• Skin-to-skin contact 
Skin-to-skin contact with your baby on your chest helps keep your baby calm and warm and 
helps establish breastfeeding. Lie in a position where your head and shoulders are raised (not flat 
on your back).  Have baby in a position where you can look into their eyes, and you can check 
that baby is well in this position. 
• Keep your baby warm 
During skin-to-skin contact your baby should wear a hat and be kept warm with a blanket or 
towel.  Once you go home from hospital your baby will no longer need to wear a hat indoors.  If 
your baby is in a cot, keep baby warm with blankets. 
• Feed as soon as possible after birth 
Ask a member of staff to support you with feeding until you are confident, and make sure    you 
know how to tell if breastfeeding is going well, or how much formula to give  your baby. 
• Feed as often as your baby wants, but do not leave more than 3 hours between feeds 
Feed your baby whenever you notice “feeding cues” which include rapid eye movements under 
the eyelids, mouth and tongue movements, body movements and sounds, sucking on a fist. 
Don’t wait for your baby to cry – this can be a late sign of hunger.  Let your baby feed for as long 
as they want and offer both breasts if you are breastfeeding. If your baby is not showing any 
feeding cues yet, hold baby in skin-to-skin and offer a feed.  To reduce the risk of low blood 
glucose your baby should have a feed within three hours of the beginning of the last feed.  Your 
midwife will talk to you about when you can move to responsive feeding.  
 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  23 
• Express your milk (colostrum) 
If you are reading this leaflet whilst you are pregnant you may wish to hand express some 
colostrum before your baby is born.  We suggest you talk to your midwife to discuss if this is the 
right thing for you and they can talk to you about how to express milk antenatally.   
If you are breastfeeding and your baby struggles to feed, try to give some expressed breast milk. 
A member of staff will show you how to hand express your milk or watch the UNICEF hand 
expression video (search “UNICEF hand expression”). You may also consider using a breast pump 
alongside hand expressing. If possible, it is good to have a small amount of expressed milk saved 
in case you need it later, so try to express a little extra breast milk in between feeds. Ask your 
midwife how to store your expressed milk and for support with using a breast pump if you still 
need to express milk after the first couple of days. 
 
Don’t hesitate to tell staff if you are worried about your baby 
 
If your baby appears to be unwell, this could be a sign that they have low blood glucose. As well as 
doing blood tests, staff will observe your baby to check he / she is well, but your observations are also 
important, as you are with your baby all the time and know your baby best. It is important that you tell 
staff if you are worried that something is wrong with your baby. Parents’ instincts are often correct. 
 
Signs that your baby may be unwell 
 
• Your baby is not feeding well 
In the first few days your baby should feed effectively at least every 3 hours, until their blood 
glucose is stable, and then at least 8 times in 24 hours. Ask a member of staff how to tell if your 
baby is attached and feeding effectively at the breast, or how much formula your baby needs.  
If your baby becomes less interested in feeding than before, this may be a sign they are unwell, 
and you should raise this with a member of staff.   
• Is your baby warm enough? 
Your baby should feel slightly warm to touch, although hands and feet can sometimes feel a 
little cooler. If you use a thermometer the temperature should be 36.50C and 37.50C inclusive. 
If your baby is cold this can lead to low blood sugar. If they are too hot this can be a sign of 
infection which can also lead to low blood sugar.   
• Is your baby alert and responding to you? 
When your baby is awake, he/she will look at you and pay attention to your voice and gestures. 
If you try to wake your baby, he/she should respond to you in some way. 
• Is your baby’s muscle tone normal? 
A sleeping baby is very relaxed but should still have some muscle tone in their body, arms, and 
legs and should respond to your touch. It can be normal to make brief, light, jerky movements. 
Ask a member of the team if you are not sure about your baby’s movements. 
If your baby feels completely floppy, with no muscle tone when you lift their arms or legs, or if 
your baby is making strong repeated jerky movements, this is a sign they may be unwell.  
• Is your baby’s colour normal? 
Look at the colour inside your baby’s lips and tongue – they should be pink. 
• Is your baby having difficulty with breathing?  
Babies’ breathing can be quite irregular, sometimes pausing for a few seconds and then 
breathing very fast for a few seconds.  
If you notice your baby is breathing very fast for a longer, continuous period, or seems to be 
struggling to breathe with very deep chest movements, nostrils flaring or making noises with 
each breath out – this is not normal. Call the emergency number given to you by your midwife.   
 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  24 
Who to call if you are worried 
 
• In hospital, inform any member of the clinical staff. 
• At home, call the emergency number given to you by your midwife. 
• Out of hours, call NHS 111 or [local number for urgent assessment] 
• If you are really worried, take your baby to your nearest Paediatric A&E or dial 999. 
 [Insert local information] 
 
 
 
What happens if your baby’s blood glucose is low? 
 
If the blood glucose test result is low, your baby should feed as soon as possible and provide skin-to-
skin contact. If the blood glucose level is very low the neonatal team may advise urgent treatment to  
raise the blood glucose and this could require immediate transfer to the Neonatal Unit. 
 
Another blood glucose test will be done before the next feed or within 2-4 hours. 
 
If you are breastfeeding and your baby does not breastfeed straight away, a member of staff will 
review your baby to work out why. If they are happy that your baby is well, they will support you to 
hand express your milk and give it by oral syringe / finger / cup / spoon. 
 
If your baby has not breastfed, and you have been unable to express any of your milk, you will be 
advised to offer infant formula. 
 
In some hospitals the team may prescribe a dose of dextrose (sugar) gel as part of the feeding plan 
because this can be an effective way to bring your baby’s glucose level up. 
 
If you are breastfeeding and advised to give some infant formula, this is most likely to be for one or a 
few feeds only. You should continue to offer breastfeeds and try to express milk as often as possible to 
ensure your milk supply is stimulated. 
 
Very occasionally, if babies are too sleepy or unwell to feed, or if the blood glucose is still low after 
feeding, he / she may need to go to the Neonatal Unit / Special Care Baby Unit. Staff will explain any 
treatment that might be needed. In most cases, low blood glucose quickly improves within 24-48 hours 
and your baby will have no further problems. 
 
Going home with baby 
 
It is recommended that your baby stays in hospital for 24 hours after birth. After that, if your baby’s 
blood glucose stable and your baby is feeding well, you will be able to go home. 
 
Before you go home, make sure you know how to tell if your baby is getting enough milk. A member of 
staff will explain the normal pattern of wet and dirty nappies and changes in the colour of dirty nappies. 
For further information, if you are breastfeeding, see ‘How you  and your midwife can recognise that 
your baby is feeding well’ (Search ‘UNICEF Baby Friendly assessment tool’). 
 
It is important to make sure that your baby feeds well at least 8 times every 24 hours and  most babies 
feed more often than this. There is no need to continue waking your baby to feed every 2–3 hours as 
long as your baby has had at least 8 feeds over 24 hours unless this has been recommended for a 
particular  reason. You can now start to feed your baby responsively. Your midwife will explain this. 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  25 
 
If you are bottle feeding, make sure you are not overfeeding your baby. Offer the bottle when baby 
shows feeding cues and observe for signs that baby wants a break. Don’t necessarily expect your baby 
to finish a bottle – let them take as much milk as they want. 
 
Once you are home, as with all newborn babies, you should continue to look for signs that your baby is 
well and seek medical advice if you are worried about your baby. 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  26 
Appendix 2. Management of reluctant feeding in healthy term infants 
 
See Flowchart D. 
 
Managing breastfed healthy term infants 
 
Healthy term babies may feed enthusiastically at birth and then sleep for many hours. To prevent a 
potential negative effect on a baby’s wellbeing, establishment of feeding and the stimulation of 
lactation follow the flow chart overleaf from birth for all well, term babies. 
 
Feeding Cues 
 
Feeding cues indicate the beginning of feeding readiness when babies are more likely to latch on and 
suck and can occur during periods of light sleep as well as when a baby is awake. Cues include rapid eye 
movements under the eyelids, mouth and tongue movements, body movements and sounds, sucking 
on a fist. Crying can be a way of indicating that the feeding cues have been missed. If this doesn’t occur, 
support should be provided and documented until effective feeding is established. 
 
Assisted feeding (cup, spoon, oral syringe) 
 
Occasionally it may be helpful to give a baby small amount of colostrum using a cup, spoon or oral 
syringe. 
 
To give a cup feed safely, hold baby in an upright position, ensuring that baby’s neck and shoulders are 
well supported. Make sure baby is fully awake, calm and alert. Half-fill the cup and hold it so that it just 
touches baby's mouth. It should reach the corners of the baby’s mouth and rest lightly on the bottom 
lip. Allow the baby to take a small sip, to encourage drinking – do  not pour the milk into the baby’s 
mouth. Tip the cup just enough so that the baby can lap the milk. Keep the cup in this tilted position 
and allow the baby to start again when ready. 
 
To give a syringe feed safely, the calm and alert baby should be held in the mother’s arms slightly 
upright, not flat. The oral syringe is gently placed in between the gum and cheek and a little colostrum 
gently instilled, no more than 0.2ml at a time. Allow the baby time to taste and enjoy the milk. Stop if 
the baby starts sucking, allow time to swallow, then give a little more. Move onto cup or paced bottle 
feeding depending on local policy and parental choice once you have more than 5ml to give.  If there is 
a clinical indication to provide formula or a mother makes an informed choice to provide formula this  
can also be given in a cup depending on local policy . A nasogastric tube may be required if the baby 
shows no cues in response to assisted feeding methods. 
 
Boosting confidence 
 
You can help and support the mother and boost her confidence by teaching her to hand express. Give 
her a supply of oral feeding syringes and feeding cups, encourage skin contact, especially in the laid-
back position and help her to recognize her baby’s feeding cues. Encourage the mother to offer her 
breast to her baby when ready, and to feed her baby expressed breast milk until baby is breastfeeding 
actively and effectively.  
 
If baby does not establish breastfeeding, support the mother to continue expressing. Ensure increasing 
volumes of colostrum/ expressed milk day by day to meet baby’s nutritional requirement. We suggest 
expressing at least 8-10 times in 24 hours, including at night with no long intervals. Some mothers can 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  27 
find it helpful to use an electric breast pump alongside hand expressing. 
 
If the mother cannot or chooses not to express colostrum 
 
The length of labour and the type of birth may influence the mother’s feelings about hand expressing 
and giving colostrum intensively for the first few hours. The mother may ask to give formula instead. 
If the mother cannot or chooses not to express her colostrum it is the responsibility of the midwife to 
ensure this is an informed decision based on awareness of the benefits of breastfeeding and the risks of 
formula. This will be documented by the midwife in the woman’s notes. Infant formula can be given by 
cup or by pacing bottle feeds depending on local policy and parental choice. Volumes should be offered 
appropriate to the baby’s age i.e. 0 to 24 hours 40 to 60 ml/kg/ per day.  
 
Once lactation is established infant formula top ups should be replaced with expressed breastmilk, if 
the mother wants to. Parents should be supported to recognise effective breastfeeding, so they can 
identify when a top up is or is not required. Avoid giving large volumes of infant formula once lactation 
is established, we suggest not exceeding 20ml of formula per feed in addition to breastfeed, if needed. 
 
Recognising effective feeding 
 
The baby should be alert, actively sucking but settled at the breast; the baby should end breastfeeding 
spontaneously and remain settled for a short period until the next feed. The feed should be pain free 
and the baby should demonstrate adequate wet and dirty nappies appropriate to age. For further 
information see the Baby Friendly Breastfeeding assessment tool5.

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  28 
Appendix 3: Use of glucose 40% oral gel 
 
Indications 
 
• Blood glucose 1.0 to 1.9mmol/L in infant with no abnormal clinical signs. 
• Severe hypoglycaemia (BG <1.0mmol/L) where there is no intravenous access. 
 
Notes 
 
• Must be given by buccal route. 
• Must be used in conjunction with a feeding plan. 
• For babies with severe hypoglycaemia (BG <1.0mmol/L) should be only used as an interim 
measure while arranging for urgent medical review and treatment with IV glucose. 
 
Dose 
 
• Use glucose 40% oral gel 200mg/kg, up to two doses given 30 minutes apart per episode of 
hypoglycaemia and a maximum of six doses of buccal gel in 48 hours. 
• Glucose 40% oral gel contains approximately 400mg/ml of glucose. A dose of 200mg/kg is 
approximately equivalent to 0.5ml/kg. Practitioners may decide that variations in glucose 
content per 1 ml glucose 40% oral gel are unlikely to be clinically significant; advice from 
the local pharmacist can be sought. 
• Table 2 provides a practical volume to administer the 200mg/kg/dose for babies within 
specific weight bands. 
 
Table 2. Volume and dose of glucose 40% oral gel by baby’s weight bands 
 
Weight of baby Volume of glucose 40% oral gel Dose of glucose 
1.5 to 1.99 kg 1 ml 400 mg 
2.0 to 2.99 kg 1.5 ml 600 mg 
3.0 to 3.99 kg 2 ml 800 mg 
4.0 to 4.99 kg 2.5 ml 1000 mg 
5.0 to 5.99 kg 3 ml 1200 mg 
6.0 to 6.99 kg 3.5 ml 1400 mg 
 
Method of administration 
 
• Draw up correct volume of glucose 40% oral gel using a 2.5 or 5ml oral / enteral syringe. 
• Dry oral mucosa with gauze, gently squirt gel with syringe (no needle) onto the inner cheek 
and massage gel into the mucosa using latex-free gloves. 
• Offer a feed, preferably breast milk, immediately after administering glucose gel. 
• Repeat oral glucose gel if baby remains hypoglycaemic according to flow chart B. 
 
Up to six doses can be given over a 48-hour period but any more than one dose should be discussed 
with the neonatal team, and it is advisable for the baby to be examined before the third dose is 
administered.

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  29 
Appendix 4: Intravenous dextrose concentration 
 
Table 3 gives the glucose infusion rate (in mg/kg/min) provided by IV glucose infusions at different 
rates. 
 
Table 3. Glucose delivery rate provided by IV glucose infusion 
 
Flow rate of 10% dextrose 
(ml/kg/day) 
Infusion rate 
(mg/kg/min) 
40 2.77 
60 4.16 
80 5.55 
100 6.94 
120 8.33 
130 9.03 
140 9.72 
150 10.42 
 
How to calculate mg/kg/min from ml/kg/day for any concentration of glucose 
 
Glucose delivery rate for any concentration of glucose solution and infusion rate can be calculated 
using the following formula: 
Glucose infusion rate (mg/kg/min) = [infusion rate (ml/kg/day) / 144] x glucose concentration (%) 
 
How to make up any concentration of glucose in any volume: 
 
If preprepared glucose solution is not available in the desired concentration, the desired concentration 
can be prepared using the following calculations: 
• Desired concentration of glucose = D%  
• Volume of desired concentration of glucose = V ml 
• Available lower concentration of glucose = L% 
• Volume of lower concentration of glucose to add = LV ml  
• Available higher concentration of glucose = H% 
• Volume of higher concentration of glucose to add = HV ml 
 
Step 1: calculate the volume of higher concentration of glucose to add (HV) 
• HV (ml) = V(ml) X (D% - L%) / (H% - L%) 
 
Step 2: calculate the volume of lower concentration of glucose to add (LV) 
• LV (ml) = V (ml) – HV (ml) 
 
Step 3: Add HV and LV to get the volume of desired concentration of glucose (V) 
• V (ml) = HV (ml) + LV (ml) 
 
When producing local guidance, neonatal units may find it useful to include tables of volumes required 
for preparation of standard glucose concentrations and worked examples according to local practice. 
 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  30 
Appendix 5: Point of Care testing for blood glucose in newborn babies 
 
Point of care testing (POCT) is defined as an analytical test performed outside of the laboratory setting, 
by a healthcare professional. Critical to this guidance is the understanding of how POCT devices 
perform in newborns.  
 
Recommendations 
 
• To fully understand the performance of any POCT, clinical staff are strongly encouraged to 
engage with their pathology department, and specifically POCT leads.  
• No POCT equipment should be used, or purchased for use in the neonatal unit, without 
engagement between pathology Healthcare Scientists and neonatal leads, to ensure it is fit for 
purpose. The quality of results produced by POCT devices on patients, and specifically 
newborns, must be understood and evidenced. 
• POCT devices should be regularly subjected to internal quality control and registered on an 
external quality assessment scheme. The results of which should be monitored by a Health and 
Care Professions Council-registered pathology Healthcare Scientist.  
• Staff using POCT equipment must have training on the device. The content of training is best 
supported by Pathology POCT Healthcare Scientists. Training must cover the following: 
• Pre-analytical sample requirements. 
• Quality monitoring of the device. 
• Limitations of the device. 
• Recording of the results. 
• The results of a POCT test are critically dependent on the quality of the sample tested. The pre-
analytical requirements for blood samples must be fully understood to produce high quality 
results.  
• Historically glucose meters were not able to demonstrate good performance in the neonatal 
population due to the patient’s high haematocrit levels and the devices poor precision at low 
glucose levels. However, there is now good evidence that some capillary blood glucose meters 
are suitable for the neonatal population and are precise and accurate at low glucose levels. 
They bring the benefits of using a very small blood volume, producing results in seconds and 
not producing incidental results for other parameters that are not clinically requested. 
Pathology Healthcare scientists can support in the understanding of performance from 
published literature, manufacturer supplied information and by performing local studies.  
• Blood gas analysers are regularly used in neonatal units and can provide accurate results at low 
blood glucose levels. It is noted that they can be set to only report glucose levels, thus 
preventing the reporting of results not clinically requested. POCT pathology staff can be 
engaged to support this formatting within departments. 
• Caution should be taken when using multiple methods for the testing of blood glucose in 
newborns. It is preferred practice to monitor glucose levels using the same method, to ensure 
changes in results reflect change in the patient as opposed to analytical method differences. 
Results must be recorded in the patient’s record including the date and time of the test, the 
operators name and the device used to do the test. The aim should be for POCT devices to be 
electronically integrated into the patients record to ensure all results are recorded with a full 
audit trail.  
 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  31 
References for Appendix 5 
 
1. Management and use of IVD point of care test devices. Medicines and Healthcare products 
Regulatory Agency. February 2021.  
2. National POCT Guidance 2023. ACB, IBMS & RCPath May 2023 
3. Tendl KA, Christop J, Bohn A, Herkner K R, Pollak A, Prusa A-R. Two site evaluation of the 
performance of a new generation point of care glucose meter for use in a neonatal intensive care 
unit. Clin Chem Lab Med 2013; 51: 1747-54.  
4. Lockyer M G, Fu K, Edwards RM, Collymore L, Thomas J, Hill T, Devaraj S. Evaluation of the Nova 
StatStrip glucometer in a pediatric hospital setting. Clinical Biochemistry 2014; 47: 840–3. 
5. Wada Y et al. Evaluation of two glucose meters and interference corrections for screening neonatal 
hypoglycaemia. Pediatrics International 2015; 57: 603–7  
6. Ba Y et al. Assessment of the performance of blood glucose monitoring systems for dysglycaemia in 
neonatal patients. BMJ Paediatrics Open 2018;2:e000339. doi:10.1136/bmjpo-2018-000339 
7. Nuntnarumit P, Chittamma A, Pongmee P, Tangoo A, Goonthorn S. Clinical performance of the new 
glucometer in the nursery and neonatal intensive care unit. Pediatrics International 2011; 53: 218-
23 
8. Klonoff D C, Umpierrez G E, Rice M J. A milestone in point of care capillary blood glucose 
monitoring of critically ill hospitalized patients. J. Diabetes Sci Technol. 2018;12:1095-100. 
9. Silverstein V. Nova StatStrip Glucose Hospital Meter System Approved for Use in Critical Care 
Patients, AJMC 2014;20: SP18, 2014, https://www.ajmc.com/view/nova-statstrip-glucosehospital-
meter-system-approved-for-use-in-critical-care-patients  
10. Raizman et al. Clinical impact of improved point-of-care glucose monitoring in neonatal intensive 
care using Nova StatStrip: Evidence for improved accuracy, better sensitivity, and reduced test 
utilization. Clinical Biochemistry 2016; 49: 879–84.  
11. Sudah Reddy VR, Sumathi ME, Beere Gowda YC, Mohamed Suhail S. Comparison of Point of Care 
(POC) Testing of Glucose by B Braun Glucometer and Hemocue Glucose 201+ Analyser Versus 
Centralised Testing in Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). J Clin Diagnostic Research. 2014; 8: 
PC10-PC13.  
12. Dixon KC, Ferris R L, Marikar D, et al. Definition and monitoring of neonatal hypoglycaemia:a 
nationwide survey of NHS England Neonatal Units. ArchDis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2017;102:F92–
F93 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  32 
References 
 
1. Deshpande SU, M; Hawdon, J.M. Admissions of term newborn infants for hypoglycaemia: 
their characteristics and preventability. The Neonatal Society; 2016; Cambridge. 
2. Dixon KC, Ferris RL, Marikar D, et al. Definition and monitoring of neonatal 
hypoglycaemia: a nationwide survey of NHS England Neonatal Units. Archives of 
disease in childhood Fetal and neonatal edition. 2016. 
3. Hawdon JM, Beer J, Sharp D, Upton M. Neonatal hypoglycaemia: learning from claims. 
Archives of disease in childhood Fetal and neonatal edition. 2016. 
4. Medicine BAoP. Newborn Early warning Trigger and track (NEWTT) - a Framework for 
Practice. 2015. https://www.bapm.org/resources/deterioration-of-the-newborn-newtt-
2-a-framework-for-practice  
5. Unicef Breast feeding assessment tool https://www.unicef.org.uk/babyfriendly/baby-
friendly-resources/implementing-standards-resources/breastfeeding-assessment-
tools/  
6. Hawdon JM, Weddell A, Aynsley-Green A, Ward Platt MP. Hormonal and metabolic 
response to hypoglycaemia in small for gestational age infants. Archives of disease in 
childhood. 1993;68(3 Spec No):269-273. 
7. Pallotto EK, Kilbride HW. Perinatal outcome and later implications of intrauterine growth 
restriction. Clinical obstetrics and gynecology. 2006;49(2):257-269. 
8. Limesand SW, Rozance PJ, Smith D, Hay WW, Jr. Increased insulin sensitivity and 
maintenance of glucose utilization rates in fetal sheep with placental insufficiency and 
intrauterine growth restriction. American journal of physiology Endocrinology and 
metabolism. 2007;293(6):E1716-1725. 
9. Leos RA, Anderson MJ, Chen X, Pugmire J, Anderson KA, Limesand SW. Chronic exposure to 
elevated norepinephrine suppresses insulin secretion in fetal sheep with placental 
insufficiency and intrauterine growth restriction. American journal of physiology 
Endocrinology and metabolism. 2010;298(4):E770-778. 
10. Hawdon JM. Disorders of blood glucose homeostasis in the neonate. In: Rennie JM, ed. 
Rennie and Roberton's Textbook of Neonatology. Vol 5th: Elsevier Churchill Linvingstone; 
2012:851-868. 
11. Stanley CA, Rozance PJ, Thornton PS, et al. Re-evaluating "transitional neonatal 
hypoglycemia": mechanism and implications for management. J Pediatr. 
2015;166(6):1520-1525.e1521. 
12. Barry JS, Rozance PJ, Brown LD, Anthony RV, Thornburg KL, Hay WW, Jr. Increased fetal 
myocardial sensitivity to insulin-stimulated glucose metabolism during ovine fetal 
growth restriction. Experimental biology and medicine (Maywood, NJ). 
2016;241(8):839-847. 
13. Rozance PJ, Hay WW, Jr. New approaches to management of neonatal hypoglycemia. 
Maternal health, neonatology and perinatology. 2016;2:3. 
14. Carberry AE, Gordon A, Bond DM, Hyett J, Raynes-Greenow CH, Jeffery HE. Customised 
versus population-based growth charts as a screening tool for detecting small for 
gestational age infants in low-risk pregnant women. The Cochrane database of systematic 
reviews. 2011(12):Cd008549. 
15. Stock SJ, Myers J. Defining Abnormal Fetal Growth and Perinatal Risk: Population or 
Customized Standards? PLoS Med. 2017;14(1):e1002229. 
16.     National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Diabetes in pregnancy: 
 Management from preconception to the postnatal period. 25/02/2015 2015. 
17. Cordero L, Treuer SH, Landon MB, Gabbe SG. Management of infants of diabetic 
mothers. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 1998;152(3):249-254. 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  33 
18. Metzger BE, Lowe LP, Dyer AR, et al. Hyperglycemia and adverse pregnancy 
outcomes. The New England journal of medicine. 2008;358(19):1991-2002. 
19. Metzger BE, Persson B, Lowe LP, et al. Hyperglycemia and adverse pregnancy 
outcome study: neonatal glycemia. Pediatrics. 2010;126(6):e1545-1552. 
20. Bateman BT, Patorno E, Desai RJ, et al. Late Pregnancy beta Blocker Exposure and Risks of 
Neonatal Hypoglycemia and Bradycardia. Pediatrics. 2016;138(3). 
21. Williams AF. Hypoglycaemia of the newborn: a review. Bulletin of the World Health 
Organization. 1997;75(3):261-290. 
22. Deshpande S, Ward Platt M. The investigation and management of neonatal 
hypoglycaemia. Seminars in fetal & neonatal medicine. 2005;10(4):351-361. 
23. Schaefer-Graf UM, Rossi R, Buhrer C, et al. Rate and risk factors of hypoglycemia in large-
for-gestational-age newborn infants of nondiabetic mothers. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2002;187(4):913-917. 
24. Groenendaal F, Elferink-Stinkens PM, Netherlands Perinatal R. Hypoglycaemia and seizures 
in large-for-gestational-age (LGA) full-term neonates. Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway: 
1992). 2006;95(7):874-876. 
25. Inoue S, Egi M, Kotani J, Morita K. Accuracy of blood-glucose measurements using 
glucose meters and arterial blood gas analyzers in critically ill adult patients: systematic 
review. Critical Care. 2013;17(2):R48-R48. 
26. Beardsall K. Measurement of glucose levels in the newborn. Early HumDev. 2010;86(5):263-
267 
27. Woo HC, Tolosa L, El-Metwally D, Viscardi RM. Glucose monitoring in neonates: need for 
accurate and non-invasive methods. Archives of disease in childhood Fetal and neonatal 
edition. 2014;99(2):F153-157. 
28. Villar J, Giuliani F, Fenton TR, Ohuma EO, Ismail LC, Kennedy SH. INTERGROWTH-21st very 
preterm size at birth reference charts. Lancet. 2016;387(10021):844-845. 
29. Ge X, Lam H, Modi SJ, LaCourse WR, Rao G, Tolosa L. Comparing the performance of the 
optical glucose assay based on glucose binding protein with high-performance anion-
exchange chromatography with pulsed electrochemical detection: efforts to design a 
low-cost point-of-care glucose sensor. Journal of diabetes science and technology. 
2007;1(6):864-872. 
30. Cornblath M, Hawdon JM, Williams AF, et al. Controversies regarding definition of 
neonatal hypoglycemia: suggested operational thresholds. Pediatrics. 
2000;105(5):1141-1145. 
31. The Baby Friendly Initiative UK. Guidance on the development of policies and guidelines 
for the prevention and management of hypoglycaemia in the newborn. 2013. 
32. Nommsen-Rivers LA, Chantry CJ, Peerson JM, Cohen RJ, Dewey KG. Delayed onset of 
lactogenesis among first-time mothers is related to maternal obesity and factors 
associated with ineffective breastfeeding. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 
2010;92(3):574-584. 
33. Matias SL, Dewey KG, Quesenberry CP, Jr., Gunderson EP. Maternal prepregnancy obesity 
and insulin treatment during pregnancy are independently associated with delayed 
lactogenesis in women with recent gestational diabetes mellitus. The American journal 
of clinical nutrition. 2014;99(1):115-121.

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  34 
34. Ma RC, Schmidt MI, Tam WH, McIntyre HD, Catalano PM. Clinical management of 
pregnancy in the obese mother: before conception, during pregnancy, and post 
partum. The lancet Diabetes & endocrinology. 2016. 
35. http://www.unicef.org.uk/BabyFriendly/What-is-Baby-Friendly/benefits-of-
breastfeeding/ 
36. Hawdon JM, Ward Platt MP, Aynsley- Green A. Patterns of metabolic adaptation for  
preterm and term infants in the first neonatal week. ArchDisChild. 1992;67(4 Spec  
No):357-365. 
37. de Rooy L, Hawdon J. Nutritional factors that affect the postnatal metabolic 
adaptation of full-term small- and large-for-gestational-age infants. Pediatrics. 
2002;109(3):E42. 
38. Jost T, Lacroix C, Braegger CP, Chassard C. New insights in gut microbiota 
establishment in healthy breast fed neonates. PloS one. 2012;7(8):e44595. 
39. Biesbroek G, Tsivtsivadze E, Sanders EA, et al. Early respiratory microbiota 
composition determines bacterial succession patterns and respiratory health in 
children. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine. 
2014;190(11):1283-1292. 
40. Sonnenburg JL, Backhed F. Diet-microbiota interactions as moderators of human 
metabolism. Nature. 2016;535(7610):56-64. 
41. Thaiss CA, Zmora N, Levy M, Elinav E. The microbiome and innate immunity. Nature. 
2016;535(7610):65-74. 
42. Honda K, Littman DR. The microbiota in adaptive immune homeostasis and disease. Nature. 
2016;535(7610):75-84. 
43. Sen S, Andrews C, Anderson E, Turner D, Monthe-Dreze C, Wachman E A.  Type of 
feeding provided with dextrose gel impacts hypoglycaemia outcomes: comparing 
donor milk, formula, and breastfeeding.  Journal of Perinatology.  (2020) 40:1705-
1711. 
44. Ponapakkam A, Rees D, Gallup MC, Ahmad KA, Miller D, Fagiana A, Carr NR.  
Supplementation-based hypoglycaemia guidelines including donor breastmilk reduce 
NICU admission.  Journal of Perinatology.  (2021) 41: 2008-2094. 
45. Harding JE, Hegarty JE, Crowther CA, Edlin RP, Gamble GD, Alsweiler JM; hPOD Study 
Group. Evaluation of oral dextrose gel for prevention of neonatal hypoglycemia 
(hPOD): A multicenter, double-blind randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med. 2021 Jan 
28;18(1):e1003411. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003411. PMID: 33507929; PMCID: 
PMC7842885. 
46. Forster DA, Moorhead AM, Jacobs SE, Davis PG, Walker SP, McEgan KM, Opie GF, 
Donath SM, Gold L, McNamaraC, Aylward A, East C, Ford R, Amir LH.  Advising women 
with diabetes in pregnancy to express breastmilk in late pregnancy (Diabetes and 
Antenatal Milk Expressing [DAME]: a multicenter, unblinded, randomized controlled 
trial.  The Lancet.  (2017) 389: 2204-2213 
47. Moorhead AM, Amir LH, Forster DA, Crawford SB.  ‘Is there any point in me doing this?’ 
Views and experiences of women in the diabetes and antenatal milk expressing 
(DAME) trial.  Maternal and Child Nutrition.  (2022) 1-12. 
48. Hay WW, Jr., Raju TN, Higgins RD, Kalhan SC, Devaskar SU. Knowledge gaps and research 
needs for understanding and treating neonatal hypoglycemia: workshop report from 
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. J 
Pediatr. 2009;155(5):612-617. 
49. Koh TH, Aynsley-Green A, Tarbit M, Eyre JA. Neural dysfunction during 
hypoglycaemia. Archives of disease in childhood. 1988;63(11):1353-1358. 
50. Lucas A, Morley R, Cole TJ. Adverse neurodevelopmental outcome of moderate 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  35 
neonatal hypoglycaemia. Bmj. 1988;297(6659):1304-1308. 
51. Boluyt N, van KA, Offringa M. Neurodevelopment after neonatal hypoglycemia: a 
systematic review and design of an optimal future study. Pediatrics. 
2006;117(6):2231-2243. 
52. Rozance PJ, Hay WW. Hypoglycemia in newborn infants: Features associated with 
adverse outcomes. BiolNeonate. 2006;90(2):74-86. 
53. Guemes M, Rahman SA, Hussain K. What is a normal blood glucose? Archives of 
disease in childhood. 2016;101(6):569-574. 
54. Marconi AM, Paolini C, Buscaglia M, Zerbe G, Battaglia FC, Pardi G. The impact of 
gestational age and fetal growth on the maternal-fetal glucose concentration 
difference. Obstetrics and gynecology. 1996;87(6):937-942. 
55. Kalhan SC, D'Angelo LJ, Savin SM, Adam PA. Glucose production in pregnant women at term 
gestation. Sources of glucose for human fetus. The Journal of Clinical Investigation. 
1979;63(3):388-394. 
56. Heck LJ, Erenberg A. Serum glucose levels in term neonates during the first 48 hours of life. J 
Pediatr. 1987;110(1):119-122. 
57. Srinivasan G, Pildes RS, Cattamanchi G, Voora S, Lilien LD. Plasma glucose values in normal 
neonates: a new look. J Pediatr. 1986;109(1):114-117. 
58. Hoseth E, Joergensen A, Ebbesen F, Moeller M. Blood glucose levels in a population of 
healthy, breast fed, term infants of appropriate size for gestational age. Archives of disease 
in childhood Fetal and neonatal edition. 2000;83(2):F117-119. 
59. Swenne I, Ewald U, Gustafsson J, Sandberg E, Ostenson CG. Inter-relationship between 
serum concentrations of glucose, glucagon and insulin during the first two days of life in 
healthy newborns. Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway : 1992). 1994;83(9):915-919. 
60. Diwakar KK, Sasidhar MV. Plasma glucose levels in term infants who are appropriate size for 
gestation and exclusively breast fed. Archives of disease in childhood Fetal and neonatal 
edition. 2002;87(1):F46-48. 
61. Harris D.L, Weston P.J, Gamble G.D, Harding J.E, Glucose profiles in healthy term infants in 
the first 5 days: The Glucose in Well Babies (GLOW) study J Pediatr. 2020; 223: 34-41.e4 
62. Harris DL, Weston PJ, Harding JE. Incidence of neonatal hypoglycemia in babies 
identified as at risk. J Pediatr. 2012;161(5):787-791. 
63. Adamkin DH. Postnatal glucose homeostasis in late-preterm and term infants. Pediatrics. 
2011;127(3):575-579. 
64. Thornton PS, Stanley CA, De Leon DD, et al. Recommendations from the Pediatric 
Endocrine Society for Evaluation and Management of Persistent Hypoglycemia in  
Neonates, Infants, and Children. J Pediatr. 2015;167(2):238-245. 
65. Anne A.M.W. van Kempen et al.  Lower versus Traditional Treatment Threshold for 
Neonatal Hypoglycemia N Engl J Med 2020; 382:534-544 
66. McKinlay, C.J.D., Alsweiler, J.M., Ansell, J.M., Anstice, N.S., Chase, J.G., Gamble, G.D., 
Harris, D.L., Jacobs, R.J., Jiang, Y., Paudel, N., Signal, M., Thompson, B., Wouldes, T.A., Yu, 
T.-Y., Harding, J.E. (2015). Neonatal g lycemia and neurodevelopmental outcomes at 2 
years. N ew England Journal of Medicine, 373 (16), 1507-1518. 
DOI:10.1056/NEJMoa1504909 
67. McKinlay, C.J.D., Alsweiler, J.M., Anstice, N.S., Burakevych, N., Chakraborty, A., Chase, J.G., 
Gamble, G.D., Harris, D.L., Jacobs, R.J., Jiang, Y., Paudel, N., San Diego, R.J., Thompson, B., 
Wouldes, T.A., Harding, J.E. (2017). Association of neonatal glycemia with 
neurodevelopmental outcome at 4.5years. JAMA Pediatrics, 171 (10), 972-983. DOI: 
10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.1579  
68. Rozenkova K, Guemes M, Shah P, Hussain K. The Diagnosis and Management of 
Hyperinsulinaemic Hypoglycaemia. Journal of clinical research in pediatric 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  36 
endocrinology. 2015;7(2):86-97. 
69. Rennie and Roberton’s textbook of neonatology, fifth edition. Publisher: Churchill 
Livingstone Elsevier, Edinburgh, 2012 
70. Boardman JP, Hawdon JM. Hypoglycaemia and hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy. 
Developmental medicine and child neurology. 2015;57 Suppl 3:29-33. 
71. Basu SK, Kaiser JR, Guffey D, Minard CG, Guillet R, Gunn AJ. Hypoglycaemia and 
hyperglycaemia are associated with unfavourable outcome in infants with hypoxic 
ischaemic encephalopathy: a post hoc analysis of the CoolCap Study. Archives of 
disease in childhood Fetal and neonatal edition. 2016;101(2):F149-155. 
72. Tan JKG, Minutillo C, McMichael J, et al Impact of hypoglycaemia on neurodevelopmental 
outcomes in hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy: a retrospective cohort study BMJ 
Paediatrics Open 2017;1:e000175. doi: 10.1136/bmjpo-2017-000175 
73. CEJ Parmentier et al "Hypoglycemia in Infants with Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy Is 
Associated with Additional Brain Injury and Worse Neurodevelopmental Outcome": 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022347622000828 
74. Weston PJ, Harris DL, Battin M, Brown J, Hegarty JE, Harding JE. Oral dextrose gel for the 
treatment of hypoglycaemia in newborn infants. The Cochrane database of systematic 
reviews. 2016(5):Cd011027. 
75. Stewart CE, Sage EL, Reynolds P. Supporting 'Baby Friendly': a quality improvement 
initiative for the management of transitional neonatal hypoglycaemia. Archives of 
disease in childhood Fetal and neonatal edition. 2016;101(4):F344-347. 
76. Bourchier D, Weston P, Heron P. Hypostop for neonatal hypoglycaemia. The New 
Zealand medical journal. 1992;105(926):22. 
77. Troughton KEVC, N.P. ;Tait, R.M.E. Hypostop gel in the treatment of neonatal 
hypoglycemia: a randomised controlled trial. Arch Dis Child. 2000;82 (suppl 1): A30. 
78. Harris DL, Weston PJ, Signal M, Chase JG, Harding JE. Dextrose gel for neonatal  
hypoglycaemia (the Sugar Babies Study): a randomised, double-blind, placebo - 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2013;382(9910):2077-2083. 
79. Harris DL, Alsweiler JM, Ansell JM, et al. Outcome at 2 Years after Dextrose Gel Treatment 
for Neonatal Hypoglycemia: Follow-Up of a Randomized Trial. J Pediatr. 2016;170:54-
59.e51-52. 
80. Hegarty JE, Harding JE, Gamble GD, Crowther CA, Edlin R, Alsweiler JM. Prophylactic Oral 
Dextrose Gel for Newborn Babies at Risk of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia: A Randomised 
Controlled Dose-Finding Trial (the Pre-hPOD Study). PLoS medicine. 
2016;13(10):e1002155. 
81. Harding JE, Hegarty JE, Crowther CA, Edlin RP, Gamble GD, Alsweiler JM, et al. (2021) 
Evaluation of oral dextrose gel for prevention of neonatal hypoglycemia (hPOD): A 
multicenter, double-blind randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med 18(1): e1003411. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/ journal.pmed.1003411. 
82. Hussain K. Investigations for neonatal hypoglycaemia. Clinical biochemistry. 2011;44(7):465-
466. 
83. Boardman JP, Wusthoff CJ, Cowan FM. Hypoglycaemia and neonatal brain injury. ArchDisChild 
EducPractEd. 2012. 
84. Burns CM, Rutherford MA, Boardman JP, Cowan FM. Patterns of cerebral injury and 
neurodevelopmental outcomes after symptomatic neonatal hypoglycemia. Pediatrics. 
2008;122(1):65-74. 
85. Menni F, de Lonlay P, Sevin C, et al. Neurologic outcomes of 90 neonates and infants with 
persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. Pediatrics. 2001;107(3):476-479. 
86. DeBaun MR, King AA, White N. Hypoglycemia in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Seminars in 
perinatology. 2000;24(2):164-171. 

Identification and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant (Birth to 72 hours) 
A BAPM Framework for Practice 
   
© BAPM, 2024  37 
87. Alexander S, Ramadan D, Alkhayyat H, et al. Costello syndrome and hyperinsulinemic  
hypoglycemia. American journal of medical genetics Part A. 2005;139(3):227-230. 
88. Kapoor RR, Flanagan SE, Arya VB, Shield JP, Ellard S, Hussain K. Clinical and molecular  
characterisation of 300 patients with congenital hyperinsulinism. European journal of  
endocrinology / European Federation of Endocrine Societies. 2013;168(4):557-564. 
89. Pietzner V, Weigel JF, Wand D, Merkenschlager A, Bernhard MK. Low-level hyperinsulinism with 
hypoglycemic spells in an infant with mosaic Turner syndrome and mild Kabuki -like 
phenotype: a case report and review of the literature. Journal of pediatric endocrinology & 
metabolism: JPEM. 2014;27(1-2):165-170.  
90. Harrington RA, Weinstein DA, Miller JL. Hypoglycemia in Prader-Willi syndrome. American 
journal of medical genetics Part A. 2014;164a(5):1127-1129. 
91. Francescato G, Salvatoni A, Persani L, Agosti M. A rare genetic disorder causing persistent 
severe neonatal hypoglycaemia the diagnostic workup. BMJ case reports. 2012;2012. 
92. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Postnatal care up to 8 weeks after 
birth. 2006, updated 2

   
 
 
YES 
 NO 
 
 
Flowchart A. Management from birth - 24 hours of term infants at risk of hypoglycaemia (Box 1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identiﬁcation and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the 
Full-Term Infant: A Framework for Practice. British Association of 
Perinatal Medicine, 2023 
NO 
No further blood glucose monitoring required unless 
there are clinical signs of hypoglycaemia (Box 2). 
Observe feeding in hospital for at least 24 hours. 
Continue to support responsive breastfeeding and 
ensure that mother understands how to assess 
effective feeding and knows how to escalate concerns.  
Complete at least one recorded breastfeeding 
assessment using local / BFI tool prior to transfer 
home. 
If formula fed give 40 to 60ml/kg/day 3 hourly over 
the ﬁrst 24 hours after birth. Increase volumes 
thereafter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 1. Infants who require routine 
blood glucose monitoring 
• Fetal growth restriction: as 
indicated by birth weight <2nd 
centile (small for gestational age, 
refer to Table 1) or clinically 
wasted. 
• Infants of mothers with diabetes. 
• Infants of mothers taking beta-
blockers in the third trimester 
and / or at time of birth .  
Dry and place baby skin-to-skin care in a warm, 
draught free room. 
Put hat on baby, and cover with a warm blanket. 
Encourage and support early breastfeeding within the 
ﬁrst hour after birth. 
For women who chose to formula feed, feed within the 
ﬁrst hour after birth and give a volume appropriate for 
40 to 60ml/kg /day.  
Provide verbal and written information to parents 
that explains how to prevent hypoglycaemia, why 
their baby needs blood glucose monitoring, lists signs 
that may indicate hypoglycaemia (Box 2),    and advises 
parents to inform a member of the healthcare team if 
they are concerned about their  baby’s well-being 
(Appendix 1). 
Encourage frequent feeding and ensure no longer 
than 3 hours between feeds. 
Assess the need for helping the mother with: ongoing 
feeding; hand expression; recognition of early feeding 
cues; and signs of  effective attachment and feeding. 
For women who chose to formula feed, give 40 to 
60ml/kg/day 3 hourly over the ﬁrst 24 hours after birth 
Check blood glucose level prior to third feed (no 
longer than 8 hours after birth): 
Is the blood glucose level ≥2.0mmol/l? 
  
 YES  
 
See Flowchart B 

   
 
 
Flowchart B. Pre-feed BG 1.0 to 1.9mmol/l and no abnormal clinical signs (birth to 72 hours) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identiﬁcation and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant: A Framework for Practice.  
British Association of  Perinatal Medicine, 2023. 
YES 
 See 
 
Does the baby have clinical signs consistent 
with hypoglycaemia (Box 1)? 
YES 
YES 
NO 
After 2 consecutive pre-feed BG measurements > 
2.0mmol/l discontinue BG monitoring unless there 
are abnormal clinical signs (Box 1), in which case use 
Flowchart C. 
Observe feeding in hospital for at least 24 hours. 
Continue to support responsive breastfeeding and 
ensure that mother understands how to assess 
effective feeding and knows how to escalate 
concerns.  
Complete at least one recorded breastfeeding 
assessment using local/BFI tool prior to transfer 
home. 
If formula fed give 40-60ml/kg/day 3 hourly over the 
ﬁrst 24 hours after birth (increasing to 70 to 
90ml/kg/day in 24 to 48 hours and 100 to 
120ml/kg/day at 48 to 72 hours of age). 
Box 3. If more than 2 measurements 
1.0-1.9mmol/l, inform neonatal team. 
Investigate for causes of 
hypoglycaemia, consider 
sepsis. 
Consider increased feed frequency, 
nasogastric tube insertion or 
IV infusion of 10% glucose. 
Box 2. Supporting breast feeding 
Encourage skin-to-skin contact. 
Offer breast feed and if not feeding 
effectively teach mother to hand 
express. 
Give colostrum obtained to baby 
by the method suitable to parents. 
Continue to encourage hand 
expression at least 8-10 times in 24 
hours and support feeding on the 
breast until infant is feeding 
effectively. 
Box 1. Signs that may indicate 
hypoglycaemia 
Lethargy 
Abnormal feeding behaviour 
especially after a period of feeding 
well 
High pitched cry 
Altered level of consciousness 
Hypotonia 
Seizures 
Hypothermia (<36.5°C) 
Cyanosis 
Apnoea 
• Consider administration of glucose 40% oral gel 
200mg/kg as part of feeding plan (Appendix 3). 
• Support breast feeding (see Box 2). If formula fed give 
40-60ml/kg/day 3 hourly over the ﬁrst 24 hours after 
birth (increasing to 70 to 90ml/kg/day in 24 to 48 
hours and 100 to 120ml/kg/day at 48 to 72 hours of 
age). 
• Recheck blood glucose before third feed, no 
later than 8 hours after birth. 
• Is the blood glucose level ≥2.0mmol/l? 
• Give feed: breast feed and/or offer expressed breast 
milk. 
• For formula fed infants give 40 to 60ml/kg/day in 3 
hourly feed volumes. 
• Recheck blood glucose before next feed. 
• Is the blood glucose level ≥2.0mmol/l? 
NO  
Repeat 
ONE loop 
then see 
Box 3 
NO  
see  
Box 3 


   
 
 
Flowchart C. Blood glucose < 1.0mmol/l and / or clinical signs consistent with hypoglycaemia 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Identiﬁcation and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant: A Framework for 
Practice. British Association of Perinatal Medicine, 2023. 
 
Do not stop the establishment of breast feeding unless the baby is too sick to feed or there is a clinical 
contraindication to enteral feeding. Support expression of breast milk. 
In formula fed infants, continue feeds if no contraindication to enteral feeding. 
Recheck blood glucose after 30 minutes. 
Blood glucose <1.0mmol/l  or 
abnormal clinical signs. 
Give IV 10% glucose 
2.5ml/kg. 
Increase glucose delivery 
rate by 2mg/kg/minute by 
increasing volume and/or 
concentration of glucose 
infusion*. 
Recheck BG after      30 minutes. 
Repeat cycle if BG 
<1.0mmol/l or there are 
abnormal clinical signs 
Blood glucose 1.0 to 
2.5mmol/l and no abnormal 
clinical signs? 
Increase glucose delivery rate 
by 2mg/kg/minute by 
increasing volume and/or 
concentration of glucose 
infusion*. 
Continue to feed if no 
contraindication. 
Recheck blood glucose after 
30 min. 
Blood glucose >2.5mmol/l.  
Slow wean of IV infusion. 
Continue enteral feeds. 
Continue to monitor 
blood glucose until infant 
is on full enteral feeds and 
blood glucose values are 
>2.5mmol/l or 3.0mmol/l 
in cases of hyperinsulinism 
(after 72 hours increase to 
>3.5mmol/l for all babies) 
over several fast-feed cycles 
for at least 24 hours 
Glucose 40% oral gel at 200mg/kg massaged 
into the buccal mucosa can be given while IV 
access is obtained OR intramuscular glucagon   
(200micrograms/kg) 
Give IV 10% glucose 2.5ml/kg.  
Start IV infusion of 10% glucose at 
60ml/kg/d. 
Obtain intravenous (IV) access. 
Collect blood sample for: laboratory conﬁrmation of blood glucose, hypoglycaemia screening tests and 
site a urine bag. 
Consider screening and treatment for sepsis. 
Admit to Neonatal Unit. 
*If glucose infusion rate >8mg/kg/min,  suspect hyperinsulinism, contact specialist team and increase the 
glucose threshold to 3.0 mmol/L  or 3.5mmol/L if >48 hours of age. 

   
 
 
 
Active feeding plan** 
Maintain skin contact. 
Review every 2 - 4 hours. 
Actively encourage breast 
feeding. 
Offer feeds according to feeding 
cues at least 8-10 times in 24 
hours when feeding is 
established. 
If breast feeding: hand express 
at least 8 times in 24 hours 
(commence pumping when 
milk comes in if mother chooses 
to do so) 
Continue to give expressed 
breast milk and actively support 
until successfully breastfeeding. 
Avoid teats, dummies and 
nipple shields. 
Support mother and listen/  
action any concerns voiced  
regarding ill- health. 
Refer to neonatal team if any 
concerns. 
Monitor well-being of baby at 
least 4 hourly*. 
Continue until feeding issue 
resolves. 
Flowchart D. Management of reluctant feeding in healthy term infants ≥ 37 weeks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identiﬁcation and Management of Neonatal Hypoglycaemia in the Full-Term Infant:  
A Framework for Practice. British Association of Perinatal Medicine, 2023. 
NO 
NO 
Once the baby is feeding 
successfully. Breastfeeding 
assessments as per local 
guidelines.  
Monitor well- being of baby at 
least 4 hourly* 
Check: 
Any maternal concerns. 
 Colour. 
Tone. 
Respiratory well-being. 
Temperature. 
Alertness / level of 
consciousness. 
Number and consistency of wet 
and dirty nappies. 
Risk for sepsis. 
If any signs of illness refer to 
neonatal team. 
Any concerns about possible 
hypoglycaemia or ill-health refer to 
relevant guideline. 
 
Complete initial Breastfeeding 
assessment. 
Within 6 hours of birth or once 
feeding initiated. 
Assess: 
Signs of effective feeding.  
Pain free. 
Maternal concerns.  
Breast / nipple damage. 
Baby readiness to feed. 
Monitor well-being* 
  
Birth 
 
 
Encourage responsiveness 
 
 
 
 
colostrum. 
 
  
YES 
 
NO 
YES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

This document was produced by the 
British Association of Perinatal Medicine (BAPM).
BAPM is a membership organisation that is here to 
support all those involved in perinatal care to optimise 
their skills and knowledge, deliver and share high-quality 
safe and innovative practice, undertake research, and 
speak out for babies and their families.
We are a professional association of neonatologists, 
paediatricians, obstetricians, nurses, midwives, trainees, 
network managers and other health professionals 
dedicated to shaping the delivery and improving the 
standard of perinatal care in the UK.
Our vision is for every baby and their family to receive the 
highest standard of perinatal care. Join us today.
www.bapm.org/join
British Association of Perinatal Medicine (BAPM) 
is registered in England & Wales 
under charity number 1199712 at 
5-11 Theobalds Road, London, WC1X 8SH
Leading Excellence in Perinatal Care