URL: https://www.ashp.org/-/media/assets/policy-guidelines/docs/therapeutic-guidelines/therapeutic-guidelines-monitoring-vancomycin-ASHP-IDSA-PIDS.pdf
Accessed: 2026-09-30
Note: 

 ASHP REPOR T
Address correspondence to Dr. Rybak  
(m.rybak@wayne.edu).
Keywords:  nephrotoxicity, 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, 
target attainment, vancomycin, vancomycin 
consensus guideline
© American Society of Health-System 
Pharmacists 2020. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.
permissions@oup.com.
DOI 10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036
Michael J. Rybak, PharmD, MPH, PhD, FCCP, 
FIDP, FIDSA, Anti-Infective Research Laboratory, 
Department of Pharmacy Practice, Eugene 
Applebaum College of Pharmacy & Health Sciences, 
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, School of 
Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, and 
Detroit Receiving Hospital, Detroit, MI
Jennifer Le, PharmD, MAS, FIDSA, FCCP, 
FCSHP, BCPS-AQ ID, Skaggs School of Pharmacy 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
Thomas P. Lodise, PharmD, PhD, Albany College 
of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Albany, NY , and 
Albany Medical Center Hospital, Albany, NY
Donald P. Levine, MD, FACP, FIDSA, School of 
Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, and 
Detroit Receiving Hospital, Detroit, MI
John S. Bradley, MD, JSB, FIDSA, FAAP, 
FPIDS, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Infectious Diseases, University of California at San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, and Rady Children’s Hospital 
San Diego, San Diego, CA
Catherine Liu, MD, FIDSA, Division of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, and Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred 
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
Bruce A. Mueller, PharmD, FCCP, FASN, FNKF, 
University of Michigan College of Pharmacy, Ann 
Arbor, MI
Manjunath P. Pai, PharmD, FCCP, University of 
Michigan College of Pharmacy, Ann Arbor, MI
Annie Wong-Beringer, PharmD, FCCP, FIDSA, 
University of Southern California School of 
Pharmacy, Los Angeles, CA
John C. Rotschafer, PharmD, FCCP, University 
of Minnesota College of Pharmacy, Minneapolis, MN
Keith A. Rodvold, PharmD, FCCP, FIDSA, 
University of Illinois College of Pharmacy, Chicago, IL
Holly D. Maples, PharmD, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences College of Pharmacy & 
Arkansas Children’s Hospital, Little Rock, AR
Benjamin M. Lomaestro, PharmD, Albany 
Medical Center Hospital, Albany, NY
T
he first consensus guideline for ther-
apeutic monitoring of vancomycin 
in 
adult patients was published in 2009. 
A  committee representing 3 organiza -
tions (the American Society for Health-
S
ystem Pharmacists [ASHP], Infectious 
Diseases Society of America [IDSA], 
and Society for Infectious Diseases 
Pharmacists [SIDP]) searched and re -
viewed all relevant peer-reviewed data 
on v
ancomycin as it related to in vitro 
and in vivo pharmacokinetic and phar -
macodynamic (PK/PD) characteristics, 
inc
luding information on clinical effi -
cacy, toxicity, and vancomycin resistance 
in 
relation to serum drug concentration 
and monitoring. The data were summar-
ized, and specific dosing and monitoring 
r
ecommendations were made. The pri -
mary recommendations consisted of 
elimin
ating routine monitoring of serum 
peak concentrations, emphasizing a ratio 
of area under the curve over 24 hours 
to minimum inhibitory concentration 
(AUC/MIC) of ≥400 as the primary PK/
PD predictor of vancomycin activity, and 
promoting serum trough concentrations 
of 15 to 20  mg/L as a surrogate marker 
for the optimal vancomycin AUC/MIC 
if the MIC was ≤1 mg/L in patients with 
normal renal function. The guideline also 
recommended, albeit with limited data 
support, that actual body weight be used 
to determine the vancomycin dosage and 
loading doses for severe infections in pa-
tients who were seriously ill.1
Since those recommendations were 
generated, a number of publications 
have evaluated the impact of the 2009 
guidelines on clinical efficacy and tox -
icity in patients receiving vancomycin 
for the treatment of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infec -
tions. It should be noted, however, that 
when the recommendations were orig-
inally published, there were important 
issues not addressed and gaps in know-
ledge that could not be covered ade-
quately because of insufficient data. 
In fact, adequate data were not avail-
able to make recommendations in the 
original guideline for specific dosing 
and monitoring for pediatric patients 
outside of the neonatal age group; spe-
cific recommendations for vancomycin 
dosage adjustment and monitoring 
in the morbidly obese patient popu-
lation and patients with renal failure, 
including specific dialysis dosage ad-
justments; recommendations for the 
use of prolonged or continuous in-
fusion (CI) vancomycin therapy; and 
safety data on the use of dosages that 
exceed 3  g per day. In addition, there 
were minimal to no data on the safety 
and efficacy of targeted trough concen-
trations of 15 to 20 mg/L.
This consensus revision evaluates 
the current scientific data and contro-
versies associated with vancomycin 
dosing and serum concentration moni-
toring for serious MRSA infections (in-
cluding but not limited to bacteremia, 
sepsis, infective endocarditis, pneu-
monia, osteomyelitis, and meningitis) 
and provides new recommendations 
based on recent available evidence. 
Due to a lack of data to guide appro-
priate targets, the development of this 
guideline excluded evaluation of van-
comycin for methicillin-susceptible 
S.  aureus (MSSA) strains, coagulase-
negative staphylococci, and other 
pathogens; thus, the extrapolation of 
Therapeutic monitoring of vancomycin for serious 
 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections:  
A revised consensus guideline and review by the American 
Society of Health-System Pharmacists, the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America, the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society
, 
and the Society of Infectious Diseases Pharmacists
applyparastyle “fig//caption/p[1]” parastyle “FigCapt”
Supplementary material is 
available with the full text of this 
article at AJHP online.
Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2020; XX:XX-XX
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
guideline recommendations to these 
pathogens should be viewed with ex -
treme caution. Furthermore, serious 
invasive MRSA infections exclude 
nonbacteremic skin and skin structure 
and urinary tract infections. Since this 
guideline focuses on optimization of 
vancomycin dosing and monitoring, 
recommendations on the appropriate-
ness of vancomycin use, combination 
or alternative antibiotic therapy, and 
multiple medical interventions that 
may be necessary for successful treat -
ment of invasive MRSA infections are 
beyond the scope of this guideline and 
will not be presented.
Methods
These are the consensus state-
ments and guideline of ASHP , IDSA, the 
Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society 
(PIDS), and SIDP . Guideline panel com-
position consisted of physicians, phar -
macists, and a clinical pharmacologist 
with expertise in clinical practice and/or 
research with vancomycin. Committee 
members were assigned key topics re-
garding vancomycin dosing and moni-
toring. A  draft document addressing 
these specific areas was reviewed by all 
committee members and made avail-
able for public comments for 30  days 
through ASHP , IDSA, PIDS, and SIDP . 
The committee then met to review and 
revise the document based on the sub-
mitted comments, suggestions, and 
recommendations. After careful discus-
sion and consideration, the document 
was revised and circulated among the 
committee and supporting organiza-
tions prior to final approval and publi-
cation. A search of PubMed and Embase 
was conducted using the following 
search terms: vancomycin, pharmacoki-
netics, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, re-
sistance, toxicity, obesity, and pediatrics. 
All relevant and available peer-reviewed 
studies in the English-language litera-
ture published from 1958 through 2019 
were considered. Studies were rated by 
their quality of evidence, and the subse-
quent recommendations were graded 
using the classification schemata de-
scribed in Table 1.
Potential limitations of this review 
included the fact that there are few 
published randomized clinical trials 
of vancomycin dosing and monitoring 
available in the literature. Most pub-
lished studies evaluating vancomycin 
dosing, dosage adjustment, and moni-
toring were retrospective PK or PD 
clinical assessments or retrospective 
observational studies in patients with 
MRSA infections.
PK/PD efficacy targets.   To 
optimize the dosing of any antimicro-
bial agent, a firm understanding of the 
drug’s exposure-effect and exposure-
toxicity links are required. While a va-
riety of PD indices for vancomycin have 
been suggested, an AUC/MIC ratio of 
≥400 (with the MIC determined by broth 
microdilution [BMD]) is the current ac-
cepted critical PK/PD index in light 
of our limited experience and studies 
evaluating AUC/MIC values of <400.1,3-7 
In vitro and in vivo assessments of PK/
PD models applicable to human MRSA 
infection have found that bactericidal 
activity (ie, a 1- to 2-log reduction in bac-
terial inoculum in the animal model) is 
achieved when the vancomycin AUC/
MICBMD ratio approximates or exceeds 
400. Furthermore, in vitro data sug-
gest that an AUC of <400 potentiates 
the emergence of MRSA resistance and 
vancomycin-intermediate S.  aureus  
strains.8,9 There are also mounting clin-
ical data, albeit mostly retrospective in 
nature, in support of this PK/PD target 
for vancomycin.10-18 A summary of these 
investigations and their findings can be 
found in eTable 1.10-17,19-23
Clinical PK/PD Data: Adults
While an AUC/MICBMD ratio of ≥400 
is currently considered the optimal 
PK/PD “efficacy” target, it is important 
to recognize that this target has been 
largely derived from retrospective, 
single-center, observational studies of 
patients with MRSA bloodstream infec-
tions.11-17 It is also important to recog-
nize that most of the landmark clinical 
studies that established the contem-
porary PK/PD efficacy target relied on 
simple vancomycin clearance (CL) for -
mulas based on daily vancomycin dose 
and estimated renal function to deter -
mine AUC values. 10,11,13 Current evalu-
ation of these data demonstrates that 
Table 1. Grading System for Recommendations Based on Quality of 
Evidencea
Category and Grade Definition
Strength of  
recommendation
 
A Good evidence to support a recommendation for or 
against use
B Moderate evidence to support a recommendation for 
or against use
C Poor evidence to support a recommendation
Quality of evidence  
I Evidence from 1 or more properly randomized con-
trolled trials
II Evidence from 1 or more well-designed clinical trials, 
without randomization; from cohort or case-
controlled analytic studies (preferably from more 
than 1 center); from multiple time-series; or from 
dramatic results from uncontrolled experiments
III Evidence from opinions of respected authorities, 
based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or 
reports of expert committees
aAdapted from the Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination.2
2  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
these CL formulas provide imprecise 
estimates of the AUC. 24-26 This finding 
is not surprising, as there is consid-
erable interpatient variability in van-
comycin exposure profiles in clinical 
practice, and it is not possible to gen-
erate valid estimates of exposure vari-
ables in a given individual based on CL 
formulas that are derived from glomer-
ular filtration rate estimation equations 
alone.10,11,13 In most cases, the formula-
based approach will overestimate van-
comycin CL by approximately 40% to 
50%.16
While it has been cumbersome to 
estimate AUC in the clinical setting 
in the past, Neely and colleagues 24 re -
cently demonstrated that Bayesian soft-
ware programs (refer to Therapeutic 
Monitoring section) can be used to gen-
erate accurate and reliable estimates of 
the daily AUC values with trough-only 
PK sampling. However, the accuracy 
of AUC estimation is higher with peak 
and trough measurements compared 
to trough-only PK sampling. 24 Using 
this validated Bayesian method to es -
timate the daily AUC in a single-center, 
retrospective study of patients with 
MRSA bloodstream infections, Lodise 
and colleagues 16 found that outcomes 
were maximized when day 1 and day 
2 AUC/MIC BMD ratios exceeded 521 
and 650, respectively. Employing the 
same Bayesian approach to estimate 
daily AUC values, Casapao and col-
leagues17 also noted that the risk of 
vancomycin treatment failure among 
patients with MRSA infective endo-
carditis was greatest among those 
with an AUC/MICBMD ratio of ≤600 and 
that this exposure-failure relationship 
persisted after adjusting for factors 
such as intensive care unit (ICU) ad-
mission, presence of heteroresistant 
vancomycin-intermediate S.  aureus, 
and other comorbidities. In contrast to 
the studies by Lodise et al and Casapao 
et  al, several small-scale, retrospec -
tive clinical evaluations of vancomycin 
exposure-response reported lower 
Bayesian-derived thresholds for AUC/
MIC since the AUC was measured at 
steady-state conditions and indexed 
to the MIC, as determined by the Etest 
(bioMérieux USA, Hazelwood, MO) 
method, to arrive at an AUC/MIC Etest 
value.12,14,15 The MIC Etest value tends to 
be 1.5- to 2-fold higher than the MICBMD 
value; therefore, it is likely that the 
AUC threshold needed for response 
from these 3 studies, 12,14,15 if calculated 
using the MICBMD, would align with the 
studies by Lodise et  al 16 and Casapao 
et al.17
In an effort to surmount the  
limitations
  as
sociated with previous
  
s
ingle-center, retrospective vancomy
-
cin
  exp
osure-response clinical ana-
lyses, a multicenter, observational 
prospective study was performed to 
evaluate the relationship between the 
prespecified day 2 AUC/MIC ratios (ie, 
AUC/MICEtest of ≥320 and AUC/MIC BMD 
of ≥650) and outcomes in adult pa-
tients (n = 265) with MRSA bacteremia. 
In the multivariate analyses, treatment 
failure rates were not significantly dif -
ferent between the prespecified day 2 
AUC/MIC groups. Post hoc global out -
comes analyses suggested that patients 
in the 2 lowest AUC exposure quintiles 
(ie, those with an AUC of ≤515 mg·h/L) 
experienced the best global outcome 
(defined as absence of both treatment 
failure and acute kidney injury [AKI]). 
While global outcomes were similar 
in the 2 lowest AUC-exposure quin-
tiles, only 20% of the study population 
(n  =  54) had an AUC of ≤400 mg·h/L, 
and it is unclear if efficacy outcomes 
are maintained at an AUC less than 
this threshold of 400 mg·h/L.23 Notably, 
the higher AUC value cited above (515 
mg·h/L) provides a new index that in-
corporates both efficacy and AKI that 
is still within the recommended AUC 
range of 400 to 600 mg·h/L (assuming a 
MIC of 1 mg/L).
Collectively, recent studies highlight 
the importance of generating valid esti-
mates of the AUC values through Bayesian 
modeling techniques when conducting 
vancomycin exposure-outcomes analyses 
in patients. Current vancomycin exposure-
effectiveness data originated largely from 
studies of MRSA bacteremia, with some 
studies for pneumonia and infective en-
docarditis and none for osteomyelitis 
and meningitis. Furthermore, outcomes 
data for a MIC of 2 mg/L are limited, sug-
gesting the need for more studies to ascer-
tain the optimal AUC/MIC target for this 
MIC value or consideration for the use of 
alternative antibiotics. The currently avail-
able data also highlight the critical need 
for large-scale, multicenter, randomized, 
vancomycin dose–optimized clinical out-
comes trials. As data from future prospec-
tive, multicenter clinical studies emerge, it 
is important that clinicians recognize that 
our current understanding of the PK/PD 
target associated with maximal effect and 
toxicity is subject to change, and this may 
ultimately alter the current way we dose 
vancomycin to optimize effect and mini-
mize toxicity.
Toxicodynamics: AKI
A major concern with vancomycin 
use is the occurrence of AKI. While 
multiple definitions of vancomycin-
associated AKI have been employed in 
the literature, most studies defined it 
as an increase in the serum creatinine 
(SCr) level of ≥0.5 mg/dL, or a 50% in-
crease from baseline in consecutive 
daily readings, or a decrease in calcu-
lated creatinine CL (CL cr) of 50% from 
baseline on 2 consecutive days in the 
absence of an alternative explanation. 1 
Recently, it has been proposed that a 
more sensitive threshold (ie, an increase 
in SCr of ≥0.3 mg/dL over a 48-hour pe-
riod) may be considered as an indicator 
of vancomycin-associated AKI. This 
threshold was adopted from the Acute 
Kidney Injury Network (AKIN) and 
the Kidney Disease: Improving Global 
Outcomes (KDIGO) criteria. 27-29 The 
incidence of vancomycin-associated 
AKI has varied across published 
studies. In a meta-analysis by van Hal 
and colleagues, 29 the prevalence of 
vancomycin-associated AKI varied 
from 5% to 43%. Similarly, a recent 
meta-analysis of 13 studies by Sinha 
Ray et  al 30 reported that the relative 
risk of AKI with vancomycin was 2.45 
(95% confidence interval, 1.69-3.55), 
with an attributable risk of 59%. Most 
episodes of AKI developed between 4 
and 17  days after initiation of therapy. 
Many patients, especially those who are 
critically ill, do not fully recover renal 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
function after AKI,31 and even mild AKI 
can significantly decrease long-term 
survival rates, increase morbidity, pro-
long hospitalizations, and escalate 
healthcare costs.22,32
With any drug, an understanding of 
its toxicodynamic profile is required for 
optimal dosing. Several studies, largely 
retrospective in nature, have attempted 
to quantify the relationship between 
vancomycin exposure and probability 
of AKI. 33,34 Although data are limited, 
the collective literature suggests that 
the risk of AKI increases as a function 
of the trough concentration, espe-
cially when maintained above 15 to 
20  mg/L.29 Similarly, there are recent 
data to suggest that the risk of AKI in-
creases along the vancomycin AUC 
continuum, especially when the daily 
AUC exceeds 650 to 1,300 mg·h/L. 24,33-35 
Furthermore, animal studies corrob-
orate the finding that increased AUC 
rather than trough concentration is a 
strong predictor of AKI.36,37
Suzuki et  al 33 evaluated the mean 
vancomycin AUC in relation to AKI. 
Most patients who developed AKI 
had AUC values between 600 and 800 
mg·h/L, compared with 400 to 600 
mg·h/L in those without AKI (P = 0.014). 
Furthermore, Lodise and colleagues 34 
showed that the probability of AKI in-
creased 2.5-fold among patients with 
AUC values above 1,300 mg·h/L com-
pared with patients with lower values 
(30.8% vs 13.1%, P = 0.02). Although AUC 
values above 1,300 mg·h/L were associ-
ated with a substantial increase in AKI, 
an AUC exposure-response relationship 
appeared to exist, and the probability of 
a nephrotoxic event increased as a func-
tion of the daily AUC and patient’s body 
weight.38 A study by Zasowski et al21 also 
reported a similar relationship between 
Bayesian-estimated vancomycin AUC 
thresholds and AKI in 323 patients; AUC 
values of ≥1,218 mg·h/L for 0 to 48 hours, 
≥677 for 0 to 24 hours, and ≥683 for 24 
to 48 hours or troughs of ≥18.2  mg/L 
were associated with a 3- to 4-fold in-
creased risk of nephrotoxicity. Similarly, 
the aforementioned multicenter, pro-
spective study of patients with MRSA 
bloodstream infections found that AKI 
increased along the day 2 AUC con-
tinuum in a stepwise manner and that 
patients with day 2 AUC values of ≥793 
mg·h/L were at the greatest risk for AKI.23
Given the understanding about po-
tential toxic concentrations, there are 
also data to suggest that AUC-guided 
vancomycin dosing may reduce the oc-
currence of vancomycin-associated AKI. 
In a retrospective, quasi-experimental 
study of 1,280 hospitalized patients, 
Finch et al20 compared the incidence of 
nephrotoxicity in patients monitored by 
individualized AUC vs trough concen-
tration. AUC-guided dosing was found 
to be independently associated with a 
significant decrease in AKI (odds ratio 
[OR], 0.52; 95% CI, 0.34-0.80; P = 0.003).20 
Median Bayesian-estimated AUC was 
significantly lower with AUC-guided 
dosing vs trough monitoring (474 [SD, 
360-611] mg·h/L vs. 705 [SD, 540-883] 
mg·h/L; P  <  0.001). In the prospective 
study by Neely et al,22 252 patients were 
monitored via troughs of 10 to 20 mg/L 
in year 1 vs Bayesian-estimated AUC 
values of ≥400 mg·h/L in years 2 and 3 
of the investigation. Nephrotoxicity oc-
curred in 8% of subjects in year 1 and 
in 0% and 2% of subjects in years 2 and 
3, respectively (P   =  0.01). The median 
trough concentration and AUC values 
associated with AKI were 15.7 mg/L and 
625 mg·h/L, as compared with values 
of 8.7 mg/L and 423 mg·h/L in subjects 
without AKI (P = 0.02).22
Collectively, the published clinical 
exposure-response analyses suggest 
that a daily AUC of ≥400 is the driver 
of effectiveness and that the risk of AKI 
is related to AUC and trough values. 
More importantly, these data provide 
the foundation for the current under -
standing of the therapeutic window 
for vancomycin. When evaluating the 
toxicodynamics of vancomycin, it is im-
portant to recognize other factors that 
may complicate or exacerbate the risk 
of AKI. Host-related factors associated 
with nephrotoxicity include increased 
weight, pre-existing renal dysfunc -
tion, and critical illness. Concurrent 
administration of nephrotoxic agents 
such as aminoglycosides, loop di
 -
ur
etics, amphotericin B, intravenous 
(i.v.) contrast dye, and vasopressors 
has been shown to increase the risk of 
nephrotoxicity. Recently, piperacillin/
tazobactam and flucloxacillin have 
been reported to increase the risk 
for AKI in patients receiving vanco-
mycin.39-44 It is unclear if the threshold 
for vancomycin-induced AKI varies 
according to these covariates, but clin-
icians should be mindful of the poten-
tial for additional risk when prescribing 
vancomycin to patients when these 
conditions are present.34,40-50
Based on the current best avail-
able evidence, daily vancomycin AUC 
values (assuming a MIC of 1  mg/L) 
should be maintained between 400 and 
600 mg·h/L to minimize the likelihood 
of nephrotoxicity and maximize effi-
cacy for suspected or definitive serious 
invasive MRSA infections. Once culture 
results or the clinical presentation rule 
out invasive MRSA infection, the em-
piric use of vancomycin at guideline-
recommended exposures should be 
de-escalated, either by a decrease in 
vancomycin exposure or initiation of 
alternative antibiotics. Extrapolation 
of guideline recommendations to non-
invasive MRSA and other pathogens 
should be viewed with extreme caution.
Therapeutic Monitoring
Therapeutic monitoring has cen-
tered on maintaining trough con-
centrations between 15 and 20  mg/L 
for serious infections due to MRSA. 
Previous expert guidelines recom-
mended monitoring trough concen-
trations as a surrogate marker for the 
AUC/MIC ratio based on the historical 
difficulty in estimating the AUC in clin-
ical practice. 1,5 In the past, calculation 
of AUC in clinical practice involved col-
lection of multiple vancomycin serum 
concentrations during the same dosing 
interval, with subsequent use of PK 
software that was not readily available 
at all institutions. As such, the guide-
line viewed trough-directed dosing as a 
more practical alternative to AUC/MIC-
guided dosing in clinical practice.
Although the recommendation 
to maintain trough values between 
15 and 20  mg/L for serious infections 
4  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
due to MRSA has been well integrated 
into practice, the clinical benefits 
of maintaining higher vancomycin 
trough values have not been well docu-
mented.38,51-55 From a PK/PD perspec -
tive, it is not surprising that there are 
limited clinical data to support the 
range of 15 to 20 mg/L. Recent studies 
have demonstrated that trough values 
may not be an optimal surrogate for 
AUC values. 26,56,57 While trough attain-
ment ensures achievement of a min-
imum cumulative exposure, a wide 
range of concentration-time profiles 
can result in an identical trough value. 
Patel et  al 26 reported a wide range of 
AUC values from several different 
dosing regimens yielding similar trough 
values. The therapeutic discordance 
between trough and AUC values is not 
surprising, as the AUC is the integrated 
quantity of cumulative drug exposure 
(ie, the serum drug concentration–time 
curve over a defined interval). In con-
trast, the trough represents a single ex -
posure point at the end of the dosing 
interval. In clinical practice, monitoring 
of trough concentrations will translate 
into achievement of one specific min-
imum daily AUC value, whereas the 
24-hour AUC (AUC24) largely represents 
the average concentration during that 
time period [AUC 24 (mg·h/L) = average 
concentration (mg/L) x 24 (hours)]. For 
troughs of 15 to 20 mg/L, this typically 
equates to a daily AUC in excess of 400 
mg·h/L. However, there is considerable 
variability in the upper range of AUC 
values associated with a given trough 
value. Although trough-only moni-
toring is practical, the potential limita-
tions surrounding the practice suggest 
that trough monitoring may be insuffi-
cient to guide vancomycin dosing in all 
patients.
Although the AUC/MIC ratio is con-
sidered the PK/PD driver of efficacy for 
vancomycin, clinicians trying to opti-
mize vancomycin treatment for patients 
with serious MRSA infections may be 
best advised to use AUC-guided dosing 
and assume a MICBMD of 1 mg/L (unless 
it is known, through BMD, to be greater 
or less than 1 mg/L). The MIC value is 
of less importance for several reasons. 
First, the range of vancomycin MIC 
values among contemporary MRSA 
isolates is narrow, and the BMD MIC 90 
in most institutions is 1 mg/L or less.58-62 
Second, measurement of MIC values is 
imprecise, with dilution of ±1 log 2 and 
variation of 10% to 20% considered ac -
ceptable; therefore, the variability of 
reported MIC values encountered in 
routine clinical practice is likely to re-
flect measurement error. 63 Third, there 
is a high degree of variability between 
commercially available MIC testing 
methods relative to the BMD method 
(see Vancomycin Susceptibility Testing 
section). Last, MIC results are typically 
not available within the first 72 hours 
of index culture collection, yet cur -
rent data indicate that the vancomycin 
AUC/MIC ratio needs to be optimized 
early in the course of infection.
Daily AUC values (assuming a 
MICBMD of 1  mg/L) should be main-
tained between 400 and 600 mg·h/L 
to maximize efficacy and minimize 
the likelihood of AKI. In the past, AUC 
monitoring required the collection of 
multiple concentrations over the same 
dosing interval. With these data, a clini-
cian would calculate the AUC using the 
linear-trapezoid rule. This approach 
required precise collection of vanco-
mycin concentrations, making it largely 
impractical outside of a research set -
ting. However, this is no longer the case. 
It is now possible to accurately estimate 
the AUC with limited PK sampling. 
One such approach involves the use 
of Bayesian software programs to esti-
mate the vancomycin AUC value with 
minimal PK sampling (ie, 1 or 2 van-
comycin concentrations) and provide 
AUC-guided dosing recommendations 
in real time. An alternative approach 
involves use of 2 concentrations (peak 
and trough) and simple analytic PK 
equations to estimate AUC values.57,64
Bayesian-derived AUC moni-
toring. Bayesian-guided dosing is 
based in part on Bayes’ Theorem, as it 
quantifies the sequential relationship 
between the estimated probability 
distribution of an individual patient’s 
PK parameter values (eg, volume [V d] 
or CL) prior to administering the drug 
based on the way the drug behaved 
in a population of prior patients 
(the Bayesian prior) and the revised 
probability distribution of a specific 
patient’s PK parameter values using 
exact dosing and drug concentration 
data (the Bayesian conditional poste-
rior). In short, Bayesian dose optimi-
zation software uses a well-developed 
vancomycin population PK model as 
the Bayesian prior, together with the 
individual patient’s observed drug 
concentrations in the data file, to cal-
culate a Bayesian posterior parameter 
value distribution for that patient. 
The dose optimization software then 
calculates the optimal dosing reg-
imen based on the specific patient’s 
profile. 65-67
An advantage of the Bayesian ap-
proach is that vancomycin concentra-
tions can be collected within the first 24 
to 48 hours rather than at steady-state 
conditions (after the third or fourth 
dose), and this information can be used 
to inform subsequent dosing (adap-
tive feedback control). As part of their 
output, Bayesian dosing programs pro-
vide innovative treatment schemes, 
such as front-loading doses with subse-
quent transition to a lower maintenance 
dosing regimen, to rapidly achieve 
target concentrations within the first 24 
to 48 hours among critically ill patients. 
The Bayesian approach also provides 
the ability to integrate covariates, such 
as CLcr, in the structural PK models (the 
Bayesian prior density file) that account 
for the pathophysiological changes that 
readily occur in critically ill patients. 
Incorporation of covariates that account 
for these “dynamic” changes serves 
as a way to identify dosing schemes 
that optimize effect and predict future 
dosing in a patient who has an evolving 
PK profile.67
Bayesian dose-optimizing software 
programs are now readily available and 
can be used in real time to identify the 
optimal vancomycin dosage that readily 
achieves the AUC target (assuming 
a MIC BMD of 1  mg/L). 66,68 Bayesian 
programs offer numerous advantages 
over the traditional first-order equa-
tion software programs. Using richly 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
sampled vancomycin PK data from 
3 studies comprising 47 adults with 
varying renal function, Neely and col-
leagues24 demonstrated that Bayesian 
software programs, embedded with a 
PK model based on richly sampled van-
comycin data as the Bayesian prior, can 
be used to generate accurate and reli-
able estimates of the daily AUC values 
with trough-only PK sampling. Of note, 
there was limited inclusion of special 
populations in this study, and it is un-
clear if this trough-only Bayesian AUC 
estimation approach can be applied 
to obese patients, critically ill patients, 
pediatric patients, and patients with 
unstable renal function. A  random-
ized controlled study of 65 subjects by 
Al-Sulaiti et al69 showed that estimating 
AUC using both peak and trough con-
centrations (vs trough-only estimates) 
may improve vancomycin-associated 
therapeutic cure. Until more data are 
available, it is preferred to estimate the 
Bayesian AUC using 2 vancomycin con-
centrations (peak and trough).
First-order PK analytic equa-
tions.   Alternatively, the AUC can be 
accurately estimated based on the col-
lection of 2 timed steady-state serum 
vancomycin concentrations and the 
use of first-order PK equations. 57 The 
equations used to compute AUC from 2 
samples are based in part on an original 
approach proposed by Begg, Barclay, 
and Duffull 70 for aminoglycosides 
and modified by Pai and Rodvold. 57 It 
is preferred that a near steady-state, 
postdistributional peak (1 to 2 hours 
after end of infusion) and trough con-
centrations within the same dosing 
interval (if possible) are used when 
estimating the AUC with the equation-
based methods.
The major advantage of this ap-
proach is that it is simpler and re-
lies on fewer assumptions than the 
Bayesian approach. The first-order PK 
equations used to estimate the AUC 
are also familiar to most clinicians, 
facilitating ease of use in practice. 
Once the AUC 24 is estimated, the clini-
cian simply revises the total daily dose 
to achieve the desired AUC 24, as alter -
ations of total daily dose will provide 
proportional changes in observed 
AUC24.
6,71-73 The major limitation of this 
approach is that it is not adaptive like 
the Bayesian approach, as it can only 
provide a snapshot of the AUC for the 
sampling period. As such, this AUC cal-
culation will not be correct if a physio-
logic change such as renal dysfunction 
occurs during or after the sampling 
period. Furthermore, it is extremely dif-
ficult to estimate the vancomycin AUC24 
with the equation-based method in pa-
tients who receive multiple dosing re-
gimens within a 24-hour period. If the 
vancomycin dosing interval is more 
frequent than once a day, the AUC24 will 
be a function of the number of identical 
doses administered during that interval 
(eg, AUC must be multiplied by 2 for a 
12-hour dosing interval to calculate the 
true AUC 24). It is also highly preferred 
that concentrations are collected near 
steady-state conditions.
Despite its drawbacks, this es -
timate of AUC is a clear step above 
trough-only or peak-only concentra-
tion interpretation and is familiar to 
most clinicians. Several large medical 
centers within the United States have 
already adopted this approach of ac -
quiring 2 postdose serum concentra-
tion estimates of the AUC to perform 
routine vancomycin dosing and moni-
toring and have demonstrated a con-
siderable improvement in safety over 
the current trough-only concentration 
monitoring method. 37,64
PK sampling time.   Timing of 
achievement of targeted AUC values 
(assuming a MIC BMD of 1  mg/L) re-
mains unclear. The early AUC/MIC 
target ratios derived in animal models 
were based on the AUC value from 0 to 
24 hours.3,4 More recent clinical assess-
ments that identified a link between 
AUC/MIC ratio and outcomes also as -
sessed the AUC values achieved early 
in the course of therapy.1,3,5-7,10,13,20-22 The 
2009 vancomycin guideline stated that 
the trough should be assessed prior 
to steady-state conditions (ie, prior to 
the fourth dose). 1,5 In fact, steady-state 
conditions are difficult to determine 
in clinical practice, and the timing of 
the fourth dose is more dependent on 
the dosing interval (ie, 12 vs 24 hours) 
than steady-state conditions. Given 
the importance of early, appropriate 
therapy,74 targeted AUC exposures 
should be achieved early during the 
course of therapy, preferably within 
the first 24 to 48 hours. If monitoring 
is initiated after the first dose, the con-
tribution of the loading dose to the 
actual AUC may vary depending on 
the magnitude of the loading dose vs 
maintenance doses. The decision to 
delay therapeutic monitoring beyond 
48 hours should be based on severity of 
infection and clinical judgment.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 1.  In patients with suspected or definitive  
serious MRSA infections, an individu-
alized target of the AUC/MICBMD ratio 
of 400 to 600 (assuming a vancomycin 
MICBMD of 1 mg/L) should be advo-
cated to achieve clinical efficacy while 
improving patient safety (A-II). Doses 
of 15 to 20 mg/kg (based on actual 
body weight) administered every 8 to 
12 hours as an intermittent infusion 
are recommended for most patients 
with normal renal function when as-
suming a MICBMD of 1 mg/L (A-II). In 
patients with normal renal function, 
these doses may not achieve the thera-
peutic AUC/MIC target when the MIC 
is 2 mg/L.
 2
.
 Given the narrow vancomycin AUC 
range for therapeutic effect and 
minimal AKI risk, the most accurate 
and optimal way to manage van
-
comycin dosing should be through 
AUC-guided dosing and monitoring 
(A-II). We recommend to accomplish 
this in one of two ways.
a. One approach relies on the collec -
tion of 2 concentrations (obtained 
near steady-state, postdistributional 
peak concentration [Cmax] at 1 to 
2 hours after infusion and trough 
concentration [Cmin] at the end of 
the dosing interval), preferably but 
not required during the same dosing 
interval (if possible) and utilizing 
first-order PK equations to estimate 
the AUC (A-II).
6  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
b. The preferred approach to monitor 
AUC involves the use of Bayesian 
software programs, embedded with 
a PK model based on richly sampled 
vancomycin data as the Bayesian 
prior, to optimize the delivery of 
vancomycin based on the collection 
of 1 or 2 vancomycin concentrations, 
with at least 1 trough. It is preferred 
to obtain 2 PK samples (ie, at 1 to 2 
hours post infusion and at end of the 
dosing interval) to estimate the AUC 
with the Bayesian approach
 (A-II). 
A trough concentration alone may 
be sufficient to estimate the AUC 
with the Bayesian approach in some 
patients, but more data are needed 
across different patient populations 
to confirm the viability of using 
trough-only data (B-II).
 3.  When transitioning to AUC/MIC 
monitoring, clinicians should con
-
servatively target AUC values for 
patients with suspected or docu-
mented serious infections due to 
MRSA assuming a vancomycin 
MICBMD of 1 mg/L or less at most 
institutions. Given the importance of 
early, appropriate therapy, vanco-
mycin targeted exposure should be 
achieved early during the course of 
therapy, preferably within the first 24 
to 48 hours (A-II). As such, the use of 
Bayesian-derived AUC monitoring 
may be prudent in these cases since it 
does not require steady-state serum 
vancomycin concentrations to allow 
for early assessment of AUC target 
attainment.
 4.
 Trough-only monitoring, with a 
target of 15 to 20 mg/L, is no longer 
recommended based on efficacy 
and nephrotoxicity data in patients 
with serious infections due to MRSA
 
(A-II). There is insufficient evidence 
to provide recommendations on 
whether trough-only or AUC-guided 
vancomycin monitoring should be 
used among patients with noninva-
sive MRSA or other infections.
 5.
 Vancomycin monitoring is re
-
commended for patients receiving 
vancomycin for serious MRSA 
infections to achieve sustained 
targeted AUC values (assuming a 
MICBMD of 1 mg/L unless it is known 
to be greater or less than 1 mg/L 
by BMD). Independent of MRSA 
infection, vancomycin monitoring 
is also recommended for all pa-
tients at high risk for nephrotoxicity 
(eg, critically ill patients receiving 
concurrent nephrotoxins), patients 
with unstable (ie, deteriorating or 
significantly improving) renal func-
tion, and those receiving prolonged 
courses of therapy (more than 3 to 
5 days). We suggest the frequency 
of monitoring be based on clinical 
judgment; frequent or daily moni-
toring may be prudent for hemo-
dynamically unstable patients (eg, 
those with end-stage renal disease), 
with once-weekly monitoring for 
hemodynamically stable patients 
(B-II).
Vancomycin Susceptibility 
Testing
With the MIC being a component 
of the vancomycin AUC/MIC targeted 
surrogate for efficacy, it is important 
to be aware of local and national van-
comycin susceptibility patterns for 
MRSA. Although in some centers there 
has been a steady increase in the av -
erage vancomycin MIC over several 
decades, recent national and inter -
national studies that have evaluated 
MRSA susceptibility to glycopeptides, 
lipopeptides, and beta-lactams have 
demonstrated that vancomycin MICs 
have remained constant over time, with 
a MIC of ≤1 mg/L demonstrated for 
more than 90% of isolates. 58-62 A  meta-
analysis of 29,234 MRSA strains from 
55 studies revealed that the MIC deter -
minations performed by BMD, Etest, 
and automated systems were predomi-
nately 1 mg/L and that there was no ev-
idence of a MIC creep phenomenon. 75 
Furthermore, a global surveillance pro-
gram reported that 95% of 57,319 MRSA 
isolates had MICs of 1  mg/L, with no 
signs of MIC creep over 20  years. 76 
While there does not seem to be a large 
number of organisms with a vanco-
mycin MIC of ≥2 mg/L when reference 
methods are used, there is considerable 
variability in MIC results between the 
susceptibility testing methods.
The challenge is that, according 
to the Clinical Laboratory Standards 
Institute (CLSI), acceptable variability  
for MIC measurement methods is within  
±1 doubling dilution (essential agree-
ment), such that current susceptibility 
testing methods are unable, with high 
reproducibility, to distinguish MICs 
of 1  mg/L from MICs of 0.5  mg/L or 
2  mg/L. Most institutions routinely 
perform MIC testing using automa
-
t
ed systems: BD Phoenix (BD, Franklin 
Lakes, NJ), MicroScan WalkAway 
(Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA), or Vitek 
2 (bioMérieux), and in some cases the 
Etest methodology (bioMérieux). In a 
study of 161 MRSA blood isolates, when 
using the essential agreement defini-
tion of ±1 log2 dilution error, Vitek 2 and 
MicroScan WalkAway demonstrated a 
96.3% agreement with BMD, whereas 
BD Phoenix demonstrated an 88.8% 
agreement.77 The Etest method had the 
lowest agreement with BMD, at 76.4% 
(results were consistently higher by 1 
to 2 dilutions). The Etest will likely pro-
duce a higher value (0.5 to 2 dilutions 
higher) than BMD. In another study, 
92% of the strains were demonstrated 
to have a vancomycin MIC of 1 mg/L by 
BMD; corresponding figures were 70% 
for MicroScan WalkAway and Etest and 
41% for Vitek 1.78
Rybak et al 79 compared MicroScan 
WalkAway, Vitek 2, BD Phoenix, and 
Etest to BMD methods among 200 
MRSA strains. In contrast to previous 
studies, these investigators used an 
absolute agreement definition of ±0 
log2 dilution error to better charac -
terize the precision. Using this def -
inition, results with BD Phoenix 
and MicroScan WalkAway had the 
highest agreement with BMD (66.2% 
and 61.8%, respectively), followed 
by Vitek 2 (54.3%). As noted above, 
Etest tended to produce results that 
were 1 to 2 dilutions higher (agree-
ment with BMD was 36.7%). However, 
when compared to BMD, Etest identi-
fied a MIC of 2 mg/L 80% of the time. 
When compared to BMD, Micro
-
S
can WalkAway (prompt method) 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
overcalled MIC values of 1  mg/L by 
74.1%, and BD Phoenix and Vitek 2 
undercalled MIC values of 2 mg/L by 
76% and 20%, respectively.
The high variability of MIC results 
among the 4 systems compared to 
BMD clearly poses a challenge to the 
clinician making treatment decisions 
based on MIC and poses questions as 
to the most relevant MIC method. 79 
This variability between MIC values 
and testing methods routinely per -
formed at most institutions further 
supports the use of AUC (assuming 
a MIC BMD of 1  mg/L) to guide vanco-
mycin empiric dosing. For nonserious 
infections, this variability may be in-
consequential. In a critically ill patient 
infected by MRSA, who may require 
prompt achievement of the target 
AUC/MIC, it is imperative to verify 
the MIC by a standardized method 
(preferably BMD, as Etest may result 
in a higher MIC than BMD) as soon 
as possible to avoid a delay in effec -
tive therapy. An AUC/MIC BMD of 400 
to 600 is approximately equivalent 
to an AUC/MIC Etest of 200 to 400, re-
flecting values that are 1 to 2 dilutions 
higher than those yielded by Etest. 
Furthermore, there are no data to sup-
port decreasing the dose to achieve 
the targeted AUC/MIC of 400 to 600 if 
the MIC is less than 1 mg/L.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 6.  Based on current national vancomycin  
susceptibility surveillance data, 
under most circumstances of empiric 
dosing, the vancomycin MIC should 
be assumed to be 1 mg/L. When the 
MICBMD is >1 mg/L, the probability of 
achieving an AUC/MIC target of
   ≥400
 
is low with conventional dosing; 
higher doses may risk unnecessary 
toxicity, and the decision to change 
therapy should be based on clinical 
judgment. In addition, when the 
MICBMD is <1 mg/L, we do not recom-
mend decreasing the dose to achieve 
the AUC/MIC target. It is important to 
note the limitations in automated sus-
ceptibility testing methods, including 
the lack of precision and variability 
in MIC results depending on method 
used (B-II).
Continuous Infusion vs 
Intermittent Infusion
Administration of vancomycin by 
continuous infusion (CI) has been 
evaluated as an alternative to intermit -
tent infusion (II) with potential advan-
tages of earlier target attainment, less 
variability in serum concentrations, 
ease of drug level monitoring (less de-
pendence on sampling time or multiple 
concentrations to calculate AUC), and 
lower the potential risk of AKI.
Comparative studies.  Published 
studies that compared intermittent to 
continuous administration primarily 
focused on 2 distinct populations, adult 
critically ill patients in the ICU with sus-
pected or documented infections and 
those receiving outpatient antimicro-
bial therapy (OPAT) for bone and joint 
infections.80-89 Most studies compared 
CI to II for the risk of AKI and attain-
ment of target serum concentrations; 
only 4 studies included other outcome 
endpoints such as treatment failure and 
mortality.80,84,87,89 Measures of vanco-
mycin drug exposure reported in clin-
ical trials include trough and average 
steady-state concentrations and AUC24. 
One challenge when comparing clin-
ical outcomes between CI and II is the 
lack of consistent reporting of exposure 
parameters between groups treated 
using the 2 dosing strategies. For CI, 
the most commonly reported drug ex -
posure parameter was the steady-state 
concentration, while for II it was the 
trough concentration. For future inves-
tigations it would be beneficial to report 
AUC and/or average steady-state con-
centration for both CI and II groups to 
enable direct comparison of drug expo-
sure between groups and correlate with 
efficacy and safety endpoints.
Critically ill patients.  A total of 
7 studies compared CI vs II of vanco-
mycin in critically ill patients. 81-87 Only 
one study, by Wysocki et  al, 80 evalu-
ated both efficacy and safety in a pro-
spective randomized trial comparing 
vancomycin CI (n = 61) and II (n = 58) 
in 119 patients. Most patients had 
pneumonia or bacteremia, mostly due 
to MRSA. Mean serum steady-state and 
trough concentrations attained were 
24  mg/L and 15  mg/L, respectively, 
for both the CI and II groups. AUC 24 
values were comparable between the 
CI and II groups, with significantly less 
variability in the CI group (P  =  0.026). 
Clinical failure rates were similar in 
the CI and II groups on day 10 (21% vs 
26%) and at end of treatment (21% vs 
19%), although the mean AUC 24 was 
shown to be lower in the CI group than 
in the II group (596 [SD,  159] mg·h/L 
vs 685 [SD,  260] mg·h/L, P  <  0.05). 
Nephrotoxicity occurred in 18% of pa-
tients overall, with similar rates in the 
CI and II groups (16% vs 19%). However, 
dialysis was required more often in 
those who received CI vs II (6 of 10 pa-
tients vs 3 of 11 patients). Risk factors 
for nephrotoxicity such as diabetes and 
concomitant diuretic, aminoglycoside, 
and iodine use were similar between 
groups. It is notable that the study only 
had 23% power to detect a difference in 
clinical outcomes between groups.1
Another study compared mor -
tality among critically ill burn patients 
receiving CI (n   =  90) or II (n   =  81).84 
Mortality rates in the hospital and on 
days 14 and 28 were numerically higher 
for those receiving CI, but the differ -
ences did not reach statistical signifi-
cance (10% vs 6.2%, 18.9% vs 11%, and 
32% vs 21%, respectively). However, 
when mortality was compared by treat-
ment indications, those who received 
CI for non–gram-positive sepsis had 
significantly higher mortality (70% vs 
16.7%, P = 0.001); nearly half of this sub-
group had gram-negative bacteremia or 
candidemia. It is possible that the dif -
ference in outcome may be attributed to 
differences in the management of those 
infections and not directly related to van-
comycin administration. Nephrotoxicity 
occurred numerically less frequently in 
the CI group than in the II group (per -
centage of patients with increase in Scr 
of 0.5  mg/dL at end of therapy, 6.7% vs 
14.8%). While higher mean vancomycin 
concentrations were noted in the CI 
8  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
group relative to the II group (20 [SD, 3.8] 
mg/L vs 14.8 [SD, 4.4] mg/L, P < 0.001), 
which would be expected when com-
paring steady-state and trough concen-
trations, AUC24 was not reported, thereby 
precluding comparison of drug exposure 
between the CI and II groups.
Five other studies compared serum 
drug concentrations achieved and the 
risk of nephrotoxicity between CI and 
II in critically ill patients. 81-83,85,86 As ex -
pected, the ranges of measured vanco-
mycin concentrations from the studies 
were significantly higher in the CI groups 
than in the II groups (steady-state con-
centrations of 20-25  mg/L vs troughs 
of 10-15  mg/L, respectively). Another 
study showed that a higher percentage 
of patients attained a vancomycin con-
centration of >20  mg/L at least once 
during the treatment course with CI 
vs II administration (63.2% vs 44.9%, 
P  =  0.065).82 One study reported lower 
mean AUC24 with CI vs II (529 [SD, 98] 
mg·h/L vs 612 [SD, 213] mg·h/L, P value 
not stated), and increased steady-state 
concentration compared with trough 
(25 ± 4 vs 17 ± 4.7 mg/L, respectively, 
P = 0.42) with CI vs. II.83 The discordance 
observed in the relationship of trough 
concentration and AUC 24 underscores 
the importance of measuring AUC 24 to 
compare relative drug exposure with CI 
vs II in future studies.
In general, the rate of nephrotoxicity 
was reported to be similar or numeri-
cally lower with CI vs II administration 
(range, 4%-16% vs 11%-19%); the same 
trend but higher rates were reported in 
studies that applied the AKIN criteria for 
nephrotoxicity (26%-28% vs 35%-37%).81-
83,85,86 In addition, Saugel et  al 85 noted 
significantly less frequent need for renal 
replacement therapy (RRT) during van-
comycin treatment for patients in the CI 
group than for those in the II group (7% 
[7 of 94 patients] vs 23% [12 of 52 pa-
tients] required RRT; P   =  0.007). Of in-
terest, in the largest retrospective study 
comparing CI and II, conducted in 1,430 
ICU patients, Hanrahan et al86 reported a 
higher rate of nephrotoxicity in those re-
ceiving CI vs II (25% [161 of 653 patients] 
vs 20% [77 of 390 patients]; P   =  0.001); 
bivariate analysis indicated that every 
1-mg/L increase in serum concentra-
tion was associated with an 11% increase 
in the risk of nephrotoxicity, with lower 
odds in those receiving II. However, lo-
gistic regression analysis indicated the 
contrary in that II was associated with 
an 8-fold higher odds of nephrotoxicity 
(95% confidence interval, 2.87-23.41). 
The lack of information provided on 
confounding variables such as receipt of 
concomitant nephrotoxins and relative 
AUCs between treatment groups pre-
clude drawing a definitive conclusion 
regarding the safety of CI, especially in 
light of the disparate results of bivariate 
and logistic regression analyses.
Patients receiving OPAT. To date 
there have been 2 studies comparing 
the efficacy of vancomycin adminis -
tration by CI vs II in patients whose 
therapy was initiated in the hospital and 
continued as OPAT . Duration of therapy 
ranged from 30  days to 14 weeks. 87,89 
Most patients were treated for bone and 
joint and skin structure–related infec -
tions. In a small prospective study, rates 
of osteomyelitis cure, defined as re-
maining asymptomatic 12 months after 
completion of therapy, did not differ 
significantly between groups (94% vs 
78%, P = 0.3), but only 27 patients were 
evaluable.87 Another study retrospec -
tively evaluated the efficacy of vanco-
mycin in patients with MRSA infections; 
most had bone and joint and skin struc-
ture–related infections, while 10% had 
bloodstream infections or endocar -
ditis.89 Rates of clinical failure were sim-
ilar in the CI and II groups (19% [25 of 
133 patients] vs 25% [9 of 36], P  = 0.41) 
after excluding 29% of study patients 
who had subtherapeutic serum van-
comycin concentrations for more than 
1 week. However, it is not clear how 
frequent serum concentrations were 
monitored, if in-hospital treatment du-
ration before OPAT differed between 
groups, and whether treatment success 
rates differed by type of infection.
In studies that evaluated the safety of 
CI vancomycin as OPAT , treatment dura-
tion ranged from 4 to 14 weeks, with a re-
ported average mean steady-state serum 
concentration of 13 to 30  mg/L. 87,88 In 
a retrospective matched cohort study 
of 80 patients, a trend towards less fre-
quent occurrence of nephrotoxicity was 
observed in the CI group vs the II group 
(10% vs 25%, P = 0.139), and when neph-
rotoxicity did occur it had a later onset 
in the CI group (P   =  0.036).88 Patients 
were matched by age, comorbid condi-
tions, gender, baseline Scr, and receipt 
of concurrent nephrotoxins; those who 
had an Scr of ≥1.5  mg/dL at baseline, 
developed nephrotoxicity as inpatients 
prior to OPAT , or experienced hypo-
tension resulting in renal dysfunction 
were excluded. In another retrospective 
study,90 the same investigators identified 
a steady-state average concentration of 
28 mg/L as the threshold breakpoint for 
the development of nephrotoxicity using 
CART (classification and regression 
tree) analysis: Nephrotoxicity occurred 
in 71.4% (5 of 7) and 11.6% (11 of 95) pa-
tients with steady-state concentrations 
of ≥28 mg/L and <28 mg/L, respectively. 
In one prospective study of an elderly 
cohort (mean age, 70  years) receiving 
high-dose vancomycin therapy by CI, 
with targeting of a steady-state concen-
tration of 30 to 40  mg/L for a median 
duration of 6 weeks, nephrotoxicity oc -
curred in 32% of patients. Additionally, 
4 patients in that study developed 
leukopenia.91
Dosing and other consider -
ations for use of CI. Most published 
studies of critically ill patients receiving 
vancomycin CI employed a loading 
dose of 15 to 20 mg/kg followed by daily 
maintenance infusions at doses of 30 to 
40  mg/kg (up to 60  mg/kg) to achieve 
a target steady-state concentration of 
20 to 25  mg/L. By simply multiplying 
the steady-state concentration by 24, a 
target steady-state concentration of 20 
to 25 mg/L would equate to an AUC 24/
MIC of 480 to 600 (assuming a MIC of 
1 mg/L). Of note, the PK/PD target for 
CI has not been validated. All of the PK/
PD data supporting an AUC24/MIC ratio 
of >400 as the best correlate for clinical 
outcomes were derived from patients 
who received II vancomycin dosing.
Rapid attainment of target serum 
concentrations has been cited as a po-
tential advantage of CI over II when 
treating acute infections, particularly 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  9
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
in ICU patients early during the course 
of infection. In 2 comparative studies, 
target steady-state concentrations of 20 
to 25 mg/L were achieved more rapidly 
with use of CI vs II: in a mean time of 
36 (SD, 31)  hours vs 51 (SD, 39)  hours 
(P  =  0.03) in one study and 16 (SD, 
8) hours vs 50 (SD, 21) hours (P < 0.001) 
in the other. 81,83 Importantly, less var -
iability in the steady-state concentra-
tion and fewer blood samples (a single 
steady-state concentration vs both 
peak and trough concentrations) are 
required to calculate AUC 24 among pa-
tients receiving CI vs II. Timing of blood 
sampling for trough determinations 
is critical during II, whereas steady-
state concentration can be measured 
any time after steady state has been 
reached during CI. In addition, vanco-
mycin administration by CI in patients 
receiving OPAT has the theoretical ad-
vantage of a need for less frequent ac -
cess to the i.v. catheter and thus less 
complications resulting from thrombus 
formation or infections. On the other 
hand, incompatibility of vancomycin 
with certain drugs (particularly at high 
concentrations), that are commonly 
administered in the critical care setting 
is a notable challenge of vancomycin 
CI.92,93 The use of proper concentration, 
alternative agents, independent lines, 
or multiple catheters may be warranted 
if vancomycin is to be administered by 
CI.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 7.  The pharmacokinetics of CI suggest  
that such regimens may be a reason-
able alternative to conventional II 
dosing when the AUC target cannot 
be achieved (B-II). Based on cur-
rently available data, a loading dose 
of 15 to 20 mg/kg, followed by daily 
maintenance CI of 30 to 40 mg/kg 
(up to 60 mg/kg) to achieve a target 
steady-state concentration of 20 to 
25 mg/L may be considered for crit-
ically ill patients (B-II). AUC24 can 
be simply calculated by multiplying 
the steady-state concentration (ie, 
the desired therapeutic range of 20 to 
25 mg/L throughout the entire dosing 
interval) by a factor of 24. Attaining 
the desired drug exposure may be 
more readily accomplished given the 
ease of sampling time and dosage 
adjustment by changing the rate of 
infusion, which is a highly desirable 
feature in critically ill patients (B-II).
 8.
 The risk of developing nephrotoxicity
 
with CI appears to be similar or lower 
than that with intermittent dosing 
when targeting a steady-state concen-
tration of 15 to 25 mg/L and a trough 
concentration of 10 to 20 mg/L (B-II). 
Definitive studies are needed to com-
pare drug exposure based on meas-
ured AUC24 and factors that predispose 
to development of nephrotoxicity, such 
as receipt of concomitant nephro-
toxins, diuretics, and/or vasopressor 
therapy in patients receiving CI vs II of 
vancomycin.
 9.
 Incompatibility of vancomycin 
with other drugs commonly 
coadministered in the ICU requires 
the use of independent lines or mul
-
tiple catheters when vancomycin is 
being considered for CI (A-III).
Loading Doses
Loading doses of vancomycin have 
been evaluated in several studies during 
the past decade. 94-109 Providing loading 
doses of 20 to 35  mg/kg based on ac -
tual body weight rapidly achieves tar -
geted ranges of serum vancomycin 
concentrations and decreases the risk of 
subtherapeutic concentrations during 
the first days of therapy. Loading doses are 
recommended in patients who are criti-
cally ill or in the ICU,95-102 require dialysis 
or renal replacement therapy,102-106 or are 
receiving vancomycin CI therapy.94-98,105,108 
While this approach is not currently sup-
ported by evidence from large random-
ized clinical trials, vancomycin loading 
doses can be considered in the treatment 
of serious MRSA infections. Vancomycin 
should be administered in a dilute solu-
tion (eg, concentrations of no more than 
5  mg/mL) and infused over a period of 
not less than 60 minutes or at a rate of 
10 to 15 mg/min (≥1 hour per 1,000 mg) 
to minimize infusion-related adverse 
events. An infusion rate of 10  mg/min 
or less is associated with fewer infusion-
related events. Loading doses of 25 to 
35  mg/kg will require infusion times of 
at least 2 to 3 hours. 99 After administra-
tion of the loading dose, the initiation of 
the maintenance dose should occur at 
the next dosing interval (eg, an interval 
of every 6 hours indicates initiating the 
maintenance dose 6 hours after the start 
of the loading dose).
In most studies that have employed 
loading doses, vancomycin dosing was 
based on actual body weight. While 
this practice is commonplace, dosing 
by actual body weight assumes there 
is a linear relationship between key 
population PK parameters (ie, V d and 
clearance) and the body size descriptor 
employed. While a wide variety of ac -
tual weight–based estimates of V d (for 
example, 0.4 to 1  L/kg) have been re-
ported in the literature, 6 mounting 
data suggest that it is not entirely ac -
curate to describe vancomycin V d as 
being proportional to body weight, 
particularly among obese patients 
(refer to Dosing in Obesity section). 
As noted in several recent articles dis -
cussing vancomycin PK in obesity, as 
weight increases the coefficient used 
to calculate V d decreases.48,110,111 At this 
point, dosing should be based on ac -
tual body weight, with doses capped 
at 3,000 mg (refer to Dosing in Obesity 
section.112 More intensive therapeutic 
monitoring should also be performed 
in obese patients.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 10.  In order to achieve rapid attain -
ment of targeted concentrations in 
critically ill patients with suspected 
or documented serious MRSA in-
fections, a loading dose of 20 to 
35 mg/kg can be considered for 
intermittent-infusion administration 
of vancomycin (B-II).1
 11.  Loading doses should be based on 
actual body weight and not exceed 
3,000 mg (refer to Dosing in Obesity 
section). More intensive and early 
therapeutic monitoring should 
10  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
also be performed in obese patients 
(B-II).
Dosing in Obesity
The original vancomycin dosing 
strategies predate our current defin-
itions of obesity and understanding 
of drug pharmacokinetics in obesity. 
Obesity is defined as a body mass index 
(BMI) of ≥30  kg/m 2 and is currently 
divided into 3 tiers: class  I  obesity 
(30.0-34.9 kg/m2), class II obesity (35.0-
39.9  kg/m2), and class  III, or morbid, 
obesity (≥40  kg/m2).113 The prevalence 
of obesity increased from approxi-
mately 10% in the 1950s to 39.8% in 
2015-2016, and the average US adult 
weighs approximately 83 kg, compared 
to the historical standard of 70 kg. 114,115 
This shift in the distribution of body 
size is relevant to the calculation of 
vancomycin doses based on patient 
body weight. Obesity may be associated 
with an increased risk of vancomycin-
induced nephrotoxicity, in part due to 
supratherapeutic exposure resulting 
from maintenance doses calculated 
using actual body weight.45,116
The selection of vancomycin 
loading dose is dependent on the es -
timated V d. Pharmacokinetic studies 
have repeatedly demonstrated that the 
vancomycin V d increases with actual 
body weight; however, this PK param-
eter does not increase with actual body 
weight in a proportionate manner and 
is not reliably predictable in obese indi-
viduals.111,117-121 Blouin and colleagues111 
demonstrated a statistically significant 
difference in weight-indexed V d be -
tween obese and nonobese patients. 
Similarly, using data from 704 patients, 
Ducharme and colleagues118 found that 
mean weight-indexed vancomycin V d 
decreased with increasing body size. 
The average weight-indexed V d in a 
study by Bauer and colleagues 119 was 
much lower in 24 morbidly obese pa-
tients (0.32 L/kg) than in 24 patients of 
normal weight (0.68  L/kg, P   <  0.001). 
Recent studies in obese adults corrob-
orate these findings and suggest that 
lower V d estimates of approximately 
0.5 L/kg or weight-independent central 
tendency estimates approaching 75  L 
are observed in obese adults. 112,120,121 
The nonlinear relationship between 
vancomycin Vd and body weight can be 
resolved with piecewise functions of al-
ternate weight descriptors, allometric 
scaling, use of lower mg/kg doses with 
increasing body size, or capping the 
dose at a threshold.118,122 The underlying 
rationale for a loading dose is rapid at -
tainment of therapeutic concentra-
tions. Therefore, using actual body 
weight–based loading doses of 20 to 
25 mg/kg (doses lower than previously 
recommended), with consideration of 
capping doses at 3,000 mg, is the most 
practical strategy in obese patients 
with serious infections. 112 For example, 
this strategy would result in calculated 
loading doses of 1,500 to 2,500  mg in 
patients weighing 80 to 99  kg, 2,000 
to 3,000  mg in those weighing 100 to 
119  kg, and 2,500 to 3,000  mg in pa-
tients with a weight of ≥120  kg (doses 
rounded to the nearest 250  mg). The 
decision of whether or not to employ a 
loading dose, as well as the magnitude 
of this dose, should be driven by the 
severity of infection and the urgency 
to achieve a therapeutic concentration 
rather than by body size alone.
Empiric maintenance dosing of 
vancomycin is reliant on estimated CL. 
Vancomycin CL is predicted by kidney 
function, which is most commonly 
estimated as CL cr with the Cockcroft-
Gault equation using patient age, sex, 
Scr, and body size.123 There is consider-
able controversy regarding the optimal 
body size metric for this calculation in 
obese patients. 124 The Cockcroft-Gault 
equation predates the global standard-
ization of Scr measurement traceable 
to isotopic-dilution mass spectrometry 
(IDMS) standards advocated to reduce 
intralaboratory and interlaboratory 
measurement variability. 124 A  recent 
population PK study by Crass and col-
leagues112 of obese patients (n   =  346) 
with BMI values of 30.1 to 85.7  kg/m 2 
and body weights of 70 to 294  kg pro-
vided an equation to estimate vanco-
mycin CL based on age, sex, Scr (IDMS 
traceable), and allometrically scaled 
body weight. This model or similar 
approaches to estimating vancomycin 
CL, such as that defined by Rodvold 
and colleagues,125 can be used to esti-
mate the total daily maintenance dose. 
The population model–estimated van-
comycin CL multiplied by the target 
AUC estimates the initial daily main-
tenance dose. 112,120,122 For example, 
studies report an average vancomycin 
CL of approximately 6  L/h in obese 
patients that equates to achieving an 
AUC of approximately 500 mg·h/L with 
a daily dose of 3,000  mg. Empiric van-
comycin maintenance dosages above 
4,500 mg/day are not expected in obese 
adults, because vancomycin CL rarely 
exceeds 9 L/h.112,120,121
Population PK models of vanco-
mycin cannot account for more than 
50% of the interindividual variabili
-
 t
y, which supports therapeutic drug 
monitoring (TDM) in this popula-
tion.117,118,120,122 A  reliable estimate of 
vancomycin V d is necessary for AUC 
estimation when AUC is based solely 
on a trough concentration measure-
ment.24,121,126,127 This bias is addressed 
and precision is improved by meas -
urement of both a peak (collected 
at least 1 hour after the end of infu-
sion) and a trough concentration to 
estimate AUC accurately in obese 
patients.126 Once a reliable PK es -
timate of vancomycin elimination  
is determined by using these 2 con-
centration measurements, subsequent 
vancomycin AUC estimation is achiev -
able with trough-only measurements 
by Bayesian methods in physiologically 
stable patients.57 For critically ill obese 
patients with unstable physiology, ad-
ditional work to design adaptive feed-
back models to tailor doses is needed.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 12.  A vancomycin loading dose of 20 
to 25 mg/kg using actual body 
weight, with a maximum dose of 
3,000 mg, may be considered in 
obese adult patients with serious 
infections
 (B-II). Initial mainte-
nance doses of vancomycin can be 
computed using a population PK 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  11
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
estimate of vancomycin clearance 
and the target AUC in obese patients. 
Empiric maintenance doses for most 
obese patients usually do not exceed 
4,500 mg/day, depending on their 
renal function (B-II). Early and fre-
quent monitoring of AUC exposure is 
recommended for dose adjustment, 
especially when empiric doses exceed 
4,000 mg/day (A-II). Measurement 
of peak and trough concentrations is 
recommended to improve the accu-
racy of vancomycin AUC estimation 
and maintenance dose optimi-
zation in obese patients, aligning 
with recommendations 2 and 5 for 
nonobese adults.
Renal Disease and Renal 
Replacement Therapies
Intermittent   hemodialysis.  
D
espite the common use of vanco-
mycin in patients receiving hemodial-
ysis, there are few published outcome 
studies that provide guidance on the 
optimal PK/PD targets in this popula-
tion. Previously published drug dosing 
recommendations generally targeted a 
predialysis serum concentration, even 
though other PD targets may be more 
appropriate. Predialysis vancomycin 
concentration to MRSA MIC ratios of 
>18.6 have been associated with im-
proved bacteremic patient outcomes, 
suggesting that serum concentration 
monitoring is essential throughout the 
course of therapy. 128 Dosing to achieve 
predialysis vancomycin concentrations 
of 10 to 20 mg/L, as has been done clin-
ically,129 results in mean AUC 24 values 
ranging from 250 to 450 mg·h/L, with 
some values below the AUC/MIC goals 
recommended in other populations. 130 
Outcome studies validating the AUC 24h 
goal of 400 to 600 mg·h/L used in other 
patient populations have not been con-
ducted in the hemodialysis population. 
Nonetheless, the maintenance doses 
recommended in this section aim to 
reach this AUC 24 target (ie, 400-600 
mg·h/L), as recommended throughout 
this document.
Many dialysis-related factors affect 
the degree of vancomycin exposure in 
these patients. These considerations 
include the amount of time between 
vancomycin dose administration and 
the scheduled time of the next dialysis 
session,104 whether the dose is given 
during dialysis or after hemodialysis 
has ended, and the dialyzer’s per -
meability if the dose is administered 
intradialytically.131 Dialysis frequency 
also plays a role in dosing decisions. 
For non–critically ill patients receiving 
hemodialysis, 2 or 3  days is the most 
common interdialytic period. Some 
critically ill patients with severe catab-
olism and AKI may require more than 
thrice-weekly hemodialysis for optimal 
metabolic control, and their main-
tenance vancomycin doses should 
be based on serum concentration 
monitoring.132
Vancomycin dosing in patients 
with acute or chronic kidney failure 
has transformed over time due to 
the changes in dialysis technology 
and techniques. 133 Older (pre-1990s) 
hemodialyzers were not very perme-
able to large molecules. Vancomycin 
(with a molecular weight of 1,450  Da) 
was not considered “dialyzable” be-
cause it poorly crossed the hemodi-
alysis membranes of the era. Indeed, 
even today’s vancomycin package in-
sert, based on PK studies conducted 
in the 1980s, states that “vancomycin 
is poorly removed by dialysis. ”
 134 As 
hemodialysis membrane technology 
has improved, dialyzers have become 
far more permeable. Vancomycin is 
cleared substantially by contemporary 
high-permeability hemodialyzers 135,136; 
consequently, vancomycin dosing 
strategies have changed substantially 
as well. For example, in spite of the 
package insert statement “In anuria, 
a dose of 1000  mg every 7 to 10  days 
has been recommended” and the 
statement that “vancomycin is poorly 
removed by dialysis, ”
 134 far more fre-
quent doses are needed to maintain 
therapeutic serum concentrations in 
patients receiving hemodialysis. The 
extent of vancomycin removal by dial-
ysis is dependent on the permeability 
of the hemodialyzer used 131; conse-
quently, investigators have developed 
and published a wide variety of vanco-
mycin dosing protocols in an attempt to 
compensate for the increase in vanco-
mycin dialytic CL caused by increases 
in dialyzer permeability.
An added complication of appro-
priate vancomycin dosing in patients 
receiving hemodialysis is the prevailing 
practice of administering the drug during 
the final hours of the hemodialysis pro-
cess, thus resulting in some of the infused 
drug being removed immediately by the 
hemodialyzer. This practice started back 
when low-permeability dialyzers were 
used and little vancomycin was elimin-
ated by hemodialysis. The practice has 
persisted at most dialysis units because 
most dialysis units treat 3 shifts of patients 
per day, and holding a dialysis chair for 
60 to 90 additional minutes while vanco-
mycin infuses into a patient is not cost-ef-
fective. Indeed, it is more cost-effective 
to infuse “extra” vancomycin during the 
hemodialysis session to compensate for 
intradialytic loss than it is to keep a dial-
ysis unit open later to allow vancomycin 
infusions. Intradialytically infused vanco-
mycin results in reduced delivery of drug 
to the patient, similar to a first-pass phe-
nomenon. The extent of intradialytic drug 
removal is variable and depends on pa-
tient and dialysis system factors, the most 
important of which is dialyzer membrane 
permeability.135,137-139 Approximately 20% 
to 40% of an intradialytically adminis -
tered vancomycin dose is removed by 
the simultaneous hemodialysis, with the 
highly permeable dialyzers tending to the 
higher end of this range.137,140,141
Maintenance dosing strategies that 
do not provide a dose with every he-
modialysis session (eg, a maintenance 
dose is given with every second or 
third hemodialysis session) have been 
studied,102,142,143 but none have been 
found to meet vancomycin exposure 
goals in the last day of the dosing in-
terval without giving massive doses 
that result in very high peak concen-
trations. Consequently, maintenance 
vancomycin doses are recommended 
to be administered with each hemo-
dialysis session to ensure therapeutic 
serum concentrations throughout 
the dosing interval. In the typical 
12  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
thrice-weekly hemodialysis schedule, 
25% larger doses are needed for the 
3-day interdialytic period (eg, Friday to 
Monday) to maintain sufficient vanco-
mycin exposure on the third day.130,144
Dosing that is weight based ap-
pears to be superior to standard dosing 
schemes that do not account for patient 
size. Further, doses should be based on 
actual body weight rather than a calcu-
lated body weight (see Dosing in Obesity 
section for considerations on how to 
dose morbidly obese patients). Because 
vancomycin is water soluble, vanco-
mycin dosing in fluid overloaded patients 
should also be based on actual body 
weight at the time of dosing rather than 
on some calculated adjusted weight.102-105
Serum concentration monitoring 
is a valuable tool to guide vancomycin 
dosing in patients receiving dialysis, 
provided that serum concentrations are 
obtained and interpreted correctly. For 
example, blood sampling for assess -
ment of vancomycin concentrations 
should not occur during or for at least 
2 hours after a hemodialysis treatment. 
These samples will not be reflective of 
the true vancomycin body load because 
of the dialytic removal of vancomycin. 
Vancomycin serum concentrations will 
be low immediately following a dialysis 
treatment but will rebound substan-
tially as drug redistributes from the tis -
sues back to the blood over the next few 
hours.131,142,145 Dosing decisions based 
on serum concentrations obtained 
during or soon after hemodialysis will 
be inherently incorrect and could re-
sult in administration of doses higher 
than necessary.145 Serum concentration 
monitoring performed with blood sam-
ples obtained prior to the hemodialysis 
treatment is recommended to guide 
dosing, although other serum concen-
tration monitoring techniques have 
been suggested.146
Dosing to achieve predialysis vanco-
mycin concentrations of 10 to 20  mg/L, 
as has been conducted clinically, 129 re -
sults in mean AUC24 values ranging from 
250 to 450 mg·h/L, often below the AUC/
MIC goals recommended in other popu-
lations.130 Outcome studies validating the 
AUC target of 400 to 600 mg·h/L used in 
other patient populations have not been 
conducted in the hemodialysis popula-
tion. While determination of AUC/MIC 
attainment is recommended, limited 
serum concentration monitoring is pos-
sible in patients receiving hemodialysis 
in the outpatient setting for 2 reasons. The 
first reason is that frequent phlebotomy 
must be avoided in order to preserve 
future hemodialysis vascular access 
needs; the second is that it is imprac -
tical to obtain blood samples aside from 
the predialysis sample that is obtained 
from the blood catheter inserted for use 
in the dialysis process. Patients leave the 
dialysis unit after hemodialysis and do 
not return until the next dialysis session 
days later. Consequently, since data are 
unavailable for an optimal AUC target in 
these patients, and no data are available 
to demonstrate efficacy below an AUC 
threshold value of 400, the goal should 
be to attain the AUC target of 400 to 600 
mg·h/L used in other patient popula-
tions. It is most practical to continue 
monitoring based on predialysis con-
centrations and extrapolate these values 
to estimate AUC. Maintaining predialysis 
concentrations between 15 and 20 mg/L 
is likely to attain the AUC target of 400 
to 600 mg·h/L in the previous 24 hours, 
with higher AUC/MIC values occurring 
on days prior.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 13.  The following tabulation outlines 
recommended vancomycin loading 
and maintenance doses for pa
-
tients receiving hemodialysis, with 
accounting for permeability of the 
dialyzer and whether the dose is ad-
ministered intradialytically or after 
dialysis ends (B-II).
Timing and Dialyzer 
Permeability
Vancomycin  
Dose, mg/kga
After dialysis ends  
Low permeability Loading: 25  
Maint.: 7.5b
High permeability Loading: 25  
Maint.: 10b
Timing and Dialyzer 
Permeability
Vancomycin  
Dose, mg/kga
Intradialytic  
Low permeability Loading: 30  
Maint.: 7.5-10b
High permeability Loading: 35  
Maint.: 10-15b
aFrom references 104, 129, 130, 137, 138, 140, 
and 147.
bThrice-weekly dose administration.
 14.  Since efficacy data are unavailable  
for AUC values of <400 mg·h/L, 
monitoring based on predialysis 
serum concentrations and extrapo-
lating these values to estimate AUC 
is most practical. Maintaining 
predialysis concentrations be-
tween 15 and 20 mg/L is likely 
to achieve the AUC of 400 to 600 
mg·h/L in the previous 24 hours  
(C-III). Predialysis serum con-
centration monitoring should be 
performed not less than weekly and 
should drive subsequent dosing, as 
opposed to a strict weight-based 
recommendation, although these 
recommended doses provide a 
useful starting point until serum 
concentrations have been deter-
mined (B-II).
Hybrid hemodialysis ther -
apies.   Contemporary renal replace-
ment therapies used to treat kidney 
disease have expanded well beyond 
thrice-weekly, 3- to 4-hour hemodial-
ysis sessions. In the outpatient setting, 
shorter, more frequent home hemodi-
alysis treatments are used in a growing 
number of patients. In the inpatient set-
ting, various types of “hybrid” hemodi-
alysis therapies are employed. These 
hybrid treatments go by many names, 
including prolonged intermittent renal 
replacement therapy (PIRRT) and 
slow-low efficiency dialysis (SLED). 
Essentially these hybrid therapies use 
standard hemodialysis machines that 
run at slower blood and dialysate flow 
rates and for longer durations (usually 
6 to 12 hours per day). Even hemodi-
alysis itself differs in the inpatient and 
outpatient settings, as patients with AKI 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  13
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
are often hemodynamically unstable 
and lack sufficient vascular access for 
robust blood flow through the dialysis 
vascular access. All these hybrid dial-
ysis therapies clear vancomycin to a 
different extent than standard intermit-
tent hemodialysis. 148,149 The timing of 
the vancomycin dose in relation to the 
hybrid hemodialysis session is essen-
tial in determining a dosing regimen. 
If hybrid hemodialysis is started soon 
after the dose is administered, much of 
the dose will be removed, whereas the 
same vancomycin dose given after the 
dialysis session ends will yield a much 
larger AUC24 and much higher average 
serum concentrations. As is the case 
with any hemodialysis therapy, serum 
concentrations obtained during or 
within 2 hours from the end of hemo-
dialysis will be artificially low because 
dialysis will have efficiently removed 
vancomycin from the blood, and van-
comycin located in the tissues will not 
have had time to redistribute back into 
the bloodstream. Calculation of main-
tenance doses based on an intra- or 
postdialytic vancomycin serum con-
centration may result in doses that are 
too high. Caution is recommended in 
basing any maintenance dosing on 
these serum concentration values.
Little has been published on the 
patient outcomes achieved when van-
comycin is used in patients receiving 
hybrid dialysis. Authors of one small 
case series of 27 courses of vancomycin 
given to patients receiving a hybrid he-
modialysis therapy reported that pre-
scribers have tried a wide variety of 
dosing schemes. 150 By these authors’ 
criteria, 89% of the prescribed vanco-
mycin doses in their institution were 
too low. Given the absence of outcome 
data in patients receiving these ther -
apies, it seems prudent to use the same 
vancomycin AUC goal recommended 
throughout this document (400 to 600 
mg·h/L assuming a MIC of 1 mg/L).
Summary and 
recommendations:
 15.  Loading doses of 20 to 25 mg/kg  
actual body weight should be used, 
recognizing that these hybrid dialysis 
therapies efficiently remove vanco-
mycin (B-III). Initial doses should not 
be delayed to wait for a dialysis treat-
ment to end. Maintenance doses of 
15 mg/kg should be given after hybrid 
hemodialysis ends or during the final 
60 to 90 minutes of dialysis, as is done 
with standard hemodialysis (B-III).130 
Concentration monitoring should 
guide further maintenance doses.
Continuous renal replacement  
therapies.   The use of continuous 
renal replacement therapy (CRRT) mo-
dalities like continuous venovenous 
hemofiltration (CVVH), continuous 
venovenous hemodialysis (CVVHD), and 
continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration 
(CVVHDF) has grown in popularity in 
critically ill patients with AKI because of 
their superior ability to provide fluid and 
solute balance. Provided these therapies 
operate in an uninterrupted fashion, 
vancomycin CL is relatively constant 
over the dosing interval, although CL 
may decline as the hemodiafilter clogs 
over time. 151 Vancomycin is removed 
by CRRT and its CL is related closely to 
the rate of ultrafiltrate/dialysate flow,105 
with hemodiafilter type being of lesser 
importance, because contemporary 
hemodiafilters are all very permeable to 
the drug.
In patients on CRRT , serum concen-
tration attainment goals often are not met 
with conventional dosing.84,152 Although 
outcomes studies specific to patients re-
ceiving CRRT have not been conducted, 
it seems prudent to apply the same van-
comycin AUC/MIC target (ie, 400-600) 
in these critically ill patients as is recom-
mended throughout this document.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 16.  Loading doses of 20 to 25 mg/kg by 
actual body weight should be used 
in patients receiving CRRT at con
-
ventional, KDIGO-recommended 
effluent rates of 20 to 25 mL/kg/h 
(B-II).153 Initial maintenance 
dosing for CRRT with effluent rates 
of 20 to 25 mL/kg/h should be 7.5 
to 10 mg/kg every 12 hours (B-II). 
Maintenance dose and dosing in-
terval should be based on serum con-
centration monitoring, which should 
be conducted within the first 24 
hours to ensure AUC/MIC targets are 
met.154 In fluid overloaded patients, 
doses may be reduced as patients 
become euvolemic and drug Vd de-
creases. The use of CI of vancomycin 
in patients receiving CRRT appears 
to be growing,84,105 and this method 
could be used in place of intermittent 
vancomycin dosing, especially when 
high CRRT ultrafiltrate/dialysate 
flow rates are employed (B-II).
Pediatric Patients
In 2011, prior to the availability of 
alternative agents for MRSA in pediat -
rics, vancomycin was recommended 
as the drug of choice for invasive MRSA 
infections in children. 5 Although there 
are limited prospective, comparative 
data on the value of vancomycin thera-
peutic monitoring in adults with respect 
to improving outcomes and decreasing 
toxicity, virtually no prospectively col-
lected data on outcomes of MRSA infec-
tion in newborns, infants and children 
exist. Further, for newborns (particu-
larly premature infants) compared with 
older infants, immature renal elimina-
tion mechanisms and a relative increase 
in Vd by body weight further complicate 
dosing guidelines during the first sev -
eral weeks of life. Additional complexity 
for dosing strategies during early child-
hood is based on a continual maturation 
of glomerular filtration, which is directly 
related to vancomycin CL. The glomer -
ular filtration rate increases through the 
first years of life to rates in school-aged 
children that are greater than those in 
adults, with subsequent decline during 
the teen years to adult normal rates. 
Such a diversity of PK parameter values 
based on developmental pharmacology 
from neonates to adolescents pro-
vides a challenge to develop general-
ized vancomycin dosing. However, this 
has improved with the application of 
population-based PK models using al-
lometric scaling and renal maturation 
14  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
covariates. In a population-based PK 
study by Colin and colleagues 155 that 
evaluated vancomycin PK throughout 
the entire age continuum from infancy 
to geriatric years using pooled data from 
14 studies, age, weight, and kidney func-
tion were important factors in estimating 
clearance. Careful monitoring in the 
pediatric population is prudent, espe-
cially with the evident dynamic changes 
in renal function in this population. As 
with adults, comorbidities and concur -
rent medications can influence vanco-
mycin tissue distribution, elimination, 
and toxicity.
Limitation of outcomes data. 
Recent retrospective studies on bac -
teremic S.  aureus infections (both 
MRSA and MSSA strains) in children 
treated with vancomycin suggest that 
trough concentrations of >15  mg/L 
were not associated with improved 
outcomes, yet an increase in AKI 
was observed. 156-158  Furthermore, an-
other retrospective pediatric study 
evaluating outcomes of MRSA bac -
teremia as a function of an AUC/
MICBMD of ≥400 did not show im-
proved outcomes. 159 Similarly, van-
comycin trough concentrations of 
<10 mg/L, as compared with concen-
trations of >10 mg/L, were not associ-
ated with increased 30-day mortality 
and recurrent bacteremia in chil-
dren, although the lower concentra-
tions were associated with prolonged 
bacteremia. 160
In the absence of prospective, com-
parative outcomes data in children re-
garding unique AUC/MIC exposures 
necessary for clinical and microbio-
logic success in treating serious MRSA 
infections in different neonatal and 
pediatric populations to validate the 
observations reported in adults (see 
Clinical PK/PD Data: Adults section), 
dosing in children should be designed 
to achieve an AUC of 400 mg·h/L and 
potentially up to 600 mg·h/L (assuming 
a MIC of 1 mg/L). This PD target range, 
specifically a range closer to an AUC/
MIC of 400 rather than 600, has been 
widely used by investigators to model 
pediatric dosing and therapeutic moni-
toring. With inadequate PK studies 
and outcomes data to support the 
higher end of the AUC target range in 
pediatrics, it is prudent to aim for an 
AUC/MIC of 400 in pediatrics to limit 
the development of exposure-related 
AKI. Furthermore, in pediatrics, an 
AUC/MIC target of 400 is more readily 
achievable than it is in adults and cor -
relates to trough concentrations of 7 
to 10  mg/L rather than concentrations 
of 15 to 20  mg/L as are reported in 
adults. This wide variability in trough 
concentrations between these popula-
tions with regard to achieving an AUC/
MIC of 400 corroborates the need for 
an AUC-guided approach to dosing 
and monitoring. It is possible that in 
otherwise healthy children with fewer 
comorbidities than are typically seen 
in adults, a lower target may yield out -
comes equivalent to an AUC of 400 to 
600 mg·hr/L. The decision to retain or 
increase AUC target exposure should 
be based on clinical judgment in the 
management of these patients.
With use of currently recommended 
vancomycin dosages of 45 to 60  mg/
kg/day, widespread treatment failures 
in children have not been reported in 
the literature, which may be reflective 
of a younger host with a more robust 
systemic and immunologic response 
to infection, a different management 
approach (surgical and antibiotic) to 
invasive MRSA infection, lack of associ-
ated comorbidities, or publication bias. 
Prospective comparative clinical trials 
involving children with documented 
infections treated with different vanco-
mycin dosages or exposures have not 
been published.
Empiric maintenance regimen. 
Published retrospective PK/PD data 
in children suggest that current van-
comycin dosing of 45 to 60 mg/kg/day 
(in divided doses administered every 
6 to 8 hours) may be insufficient to 
achieve currently recommended tar -
gets for adults of an AUC of 400 to 600 
mg·h/L (assuming a MIC of 1  mg/L). 1 
In fact, higher dosages, ranging from 
60 to 80  mg/kg/day and given in di-
vided doses every 6 hours, may be 
needed to achieve these targets for 
MRSA strains with a vancomycin MIC 
of 1  mg/L or less, 
 pr
esumably as a re-
sult of greater vancomycin CL than is 
seen in adults. 1,161-164 For children in-
fected by MRSA pathogens with a MIC 
of >1 mg/L, it is unlikely that the target 
exposure can be reliably achieved with 
previously investigated dosages of van-
comycin in children.
Le and colleagues 164 utilized 
population-based PK modeling to an-
alyze 1,660 vancomycin serum con-
centrations obtained at 2 institutions 
from 2003 to 2011 among 702 children 
older than 3 months of age with varying 
comorbidities. They demonstrated that 
4 important factors (age, weight, renal 
function as assessed by SCr, and MIC) 
contributed to vancomycin exposure. 
Monte Carlo simulations were created 
using population-based PK modeling 
with Bayesian estimation and MICs of 
clinical isolates as determined by Etest, 
with 85% of clinical isolates demon-
strated to have a MIC Etest of 1  mg/L or 
less. To achieve an AUC/MICEtest of ≥400 
in 90% of subjects, a dosage of 80 mg/kg/
day was necessary, particularly in those 
less than 12  years of age with normal 
renal function. At a dosage of 80  mg/
kg/day, the median AUC and median 
trough concentration were 675 mg·h/L 
and 16  mg/L, respectively. As expected, 
subjects 12 years of age or older achieved 
similar exposure at lower dosages of 60 
to 70  mg/kg/day. At a dosage of 60 to 
70  mg/kg/day (divided doses admin-
istered every 6 hours), an AUC of 400 
mg·h/L correlated to a mean trough of 8 
to 9 mg/L.164 The clinical applicability of 
this PK model for vancomyin CL estima-
tion to determine AUC exposure was val-
idated in a small study by Ploessl et al.165
Other studies corroborated Le and 
colleagues’ findings regarding the need 
to use higher dosages, ranging from 60 
to 80 mg/kg/day, depending on age and 
renal function.162,164,166,167 Using the liter-
ature for vancomyin CL published in or 
before 2000 and Bayesian estimation 
for one 25-kg base subject, Frymoyer 
et  al163 evaluated the relationship be-
tween AUC and trough concentrations, 
showing that a dosage of 60 mg/kg/day 
achieved trough concentrations of 7 to 
10  mg/L and an AUC/MIC of ≥400 in 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  15
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
90% of children for MRSA pathogens 
with a MIC of 1  mg/L. However, their 
finding may not be extrapolatable to the 
entire pediatric population given the 
variable ages and renal function. In a 
second study, these investigators dem-
onstrated that a dosage of 60 mg/kg/day 
achieved AUC/MICBMD values between 
386 and 583 (assuming a MIC BMD of 
1 mg/L) in children 2 to 12 years of age, 
indicating that some younger children 
may require higher doses to achieve 
target AUC/MIC BMD.162 The probability 
of target attainment was not provided, 
and dosages above 60 mg/kg/day were 
not evaluated in this study.
Two retrospective studies that util-
ized non-Bayesian methods evaluated 
trough concentration targets of 10 to 
20  mg/L (a higher range than that used 
by Le et al 164 and Frymoyer et al163, who 
also assessed AUC) in children 1 month 
to 18 years of age. An interesting finding 
of the study of Madigan et al166 was that 
a dosage of 60  mg/kg/day achieved the 
target trough concentration in only 17% 
of preschool-aged children 2 to 5  years 
old, which was the lowest attainment 
for any pediatric age group. Eiland and 
colleagues161 showed that dosages of 
70 to 80  mg/kg/day were necessary to 
achieve trough concentrations of 10 to 
20 mg/L. Another study, by Abdel et al,168 
demonstrated that dosages higher than 
60 mg/kg/day were necessary to achieve 
an AUC/MIC of ≥400 in children with 
cancer. The mean age in this study co-
hort was 6 (SD, 2.5) years; it is possible 
that young age with greater CL may have 
been a contributing factor for the need 
for an increased dose, an observation 
uncovered in studies by Le et  al 164 and 
Madigan et al.166
As a drug that demonstrates renal 
elimination, vancomycin requires dosage 
adjustment in children with acute or 
chronic renal insufficiency. Le and col-
leagues169 conducted a population-based 
PK analysis with Bayesian methods that 
evaluated 63 case-control pairs (matched 
by age and weight) with 319 vancomycin 
serum concentrations. The mean age of 
this study cohort was 13 (SD, 6) years. The 
investigators reported that a vancomycin 
dosage of 45  mg/kg/day (ie, 15  mg/kg 
every 8 hours) in renally impaired chil-
dren achieved AUC exposure similar to 
that achieved with a dosage of 60 mg/kg/
day in children with normal renal func-
tion. Notably, they showed that in 87% 
of children with initial renal impairment, 
vancomycin CL improved (with a lag in 
the recovery of renal function as assessed 
by SCr) within the first 5 days of therapy, 
indicating some degree of renal function 
recovery, a finding that provides support 
for ongoing vancomycin TDM. In ad-
dition, vancomycin CL does not always 
correlate well with renal function (as as-
sessed by creatinine CL) in children, par-
ticularly in those who are acutely ill in the 
ICU setting and have varying degrees of 
renal dysfunction. Rapid return of renal 
function may occur over the first few days 
after ICU admission. As such, therapeutic 
monitoring of both serum concentrations 
and renal function should be conducted 
during vancomycin therapy.170,171
Loading doses.  Loading doses 
of 25 to 30 mg/kg for critically ill adults 
have been suggested to achieve steady-
state concentrations more quickly, but 
preliminary data on pediatric patients 
suggest that the benefit of a loading 
dose of 30  mg/kg is quickly lost if the 
maintenance dose is insufficient to 
provide adequate ongoing exposure. 167 
However, the concept of a loading dose 
accompanied by a daily maintenance 
dose sufficient to achieve the target 
exposure and initiated at a specified 
time after the loading dose should be 
investigated.
Minimizing AKI risk.  Similar to 
the literature on adults, the literature 
in pediatrics suggests, in aggregate, 
that the risk of AKI increases as a func -
tion of vancomycin exposure, espe-
cially when the trough concentration 
exceeds 15 to 20  mg/L. In fact, Fiorito 
and colleagues 158 reported in a recent 
meta-analysis of 10 pediatric studies 
that troughs of ≥15 mg/L increased the 
OR for AKI by 2.7-fold (95% confidence 
interval, 1.82-4.05) and that AKI was 
further correlated with a stay in the pe-
diatric ICU. McKamy and colleagues 172 
published results of the first study that 
uncovered the association between 
vancomycin trough concentrations 
greater than 15 to 20 mg/L and AKI in 
pediatric patients. In addition, they 
showed that children who received con-
current nephrotoxic drugs (particularly 
furosemide) and stayed in the pediatric 
ICU were also more likely to experi-
ence AKI. Four studies published later 
corroborated these findings, indicating 
that the interplay of multiple factors 
in addition to vancomycin exposure 
contributed to AKI. 173-176 Interestingly, 
Sinclair et al174 reported that a 5-mg/kg 
dose augmentation or each additional 
day of vancomycin use increased the 
risk of AKI. Knoderer and colleagues 173 
evaluated late-onset AKI (defined as 
occurring after 7  days of vancomycin 
therapy) and observed that young age 
(<1 year) was independently associated 
with late AKI.
One pediatric study evaluated the 
relationship of AKI with vancomycin 
AUC and trough concentrations, both 
derived by Bayesian estimation. Le 
and colleagues 19 conducted a large 
population-based PK analysis using 
1,576 serum concentrations collected 
from 680 pediatric subjects. A  contin-
uous exposure-response relationship 
was observed, with 10%, 33%, and 57% 
of patients who respectively achieved 
AUC values of ≥400, 800, and 1,000 
mg·h/L experiencing AKI. Even after 
adjusting for ICU stay and concomi-
tant use of nephrotoxic drugs, an AUC 
of ≥800 mg·h/L and trough concentra-
tions of ≥15  mg/L were independently 
associated with a greater than 2.5-fold 
increased risk of AKI. The linkage of 
AUC to AKI, along with the strong cor -
relation between AUC and trough con-
centrations (Spearman’s coefficient, 
0.963; P  <  0.001), reinforces AUC as a 
plausible PK/PD parameter for thera-
peutic monitoring that encompasses 
both therapeutic and toxic responses. 
Vancomycin exposure should be main-
tained at an AUC of <800 mg·h/L to 
minimize AKI risk. As such, vanco-
mycin dosages of ≥100  mg/kg/day 
should be avoided given that the pro-
jected median AUC and trough values 
are 843 mg·h/L and 21  mg/L, respec -
tively, at a dosage of 100 mg/kg/day. 164 
However, enhanced renal clearance of 
16  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
vancomycin may transiently occur in 
specific situations in children, in which 
case the dose of vancomycin may need 
to be higher than is usually prescribed 
to achieve an AUC of 400 mg·h/L, 
highlighting the need for therapeutic 
monitoring.
Therapeutic monitoring.  Recent 
literature on vancomycin in pediatrics 
has focused primarily on PK analysis 
to support optimal dosing. Le and col-
leagues177 conducted a population-
based PK analysis in 138 pediatric 
subjects who were more than 3 months 
of age, evaluating 712 serum vanco-
mycin concentrations (collected mostly 
after the third or fourth dose). They 
showed that both accuracy and preci-
sion for estimating AUC 24 (calculated 
by total daily dose over vancomycin CL, 
with the integration of Bayesian estima-
tion) were improved using 2 concentra-
tions (peak and trough), compared with 
trough-only monitoring. Furthermore, 
the 2-concentration approach im-
proved the prediction of future AUC 
exposure in patients. 177 Another study, 
by Stockmann et  al, 178 evaluated AUC‐
based vancomycin monitoring in 23 
pediatric patients with cystic fibrosis. 
The researchers demonstrated that 
2 concentrations calculated using a 
standard PK equation and a trough 
concentration calculated using a 
Bayesian population-based PK model 
produced similar AUC estimations. 
Despite the availability of limited 
studies on vancomycin monitoring in 
pediatrics, the findings appear con-
gruent with adult data supporting 
AUC-guided therapeutic moni-
toring that incorporates the Bayesian 
method, especially if only a single 
trough concentration is available. 
Furthermore, this AUC-guided moni-
toring approach also appears prudent 
in order to predict toxicity in light of 
AKI data in pediatrics.
Overall, there are limited pediatric 
outcomes data to support the AUC 
target correlated with drug effectiveness 
in adults. Some of the differences found 
between adults and children treated for 
MRSA infections with vancomycin in-
clude the complexity of vancomycin CL 
in the various pediatric age groups, and 
the differences in tissue site-of-infection 
drug exposure (eg, common occurrence 
of multifocal complicated osteomyelitis 
in children requiring therapeutic bone 
concentrations, with rare occurrence 
of MRSA endocarditis) suggest that fur-
ther studies in children that incorporate 
prospective assessment of clinical out -
comes and large sample size are needed 
to identify the optimal dosing strat -
egies for MRSA infections in pediatrics. 
Until additional data are available, the 
AUC target used in adults (ie, from 400 
up to 600 mg·h/L [assuming a MIC of 
1 mg/L]) appears to be the most appro-
priate initial target for vancomycin ex -
posures in all pediatric age groups. For 
most children across the pediatric age 
groups, assuming a vancomycin MIC 
of 1  mg/L, published data suggest that 
a dosage of 60 to 80 mg/kg/day (given in 
divided doses every 6 hours) is required 
to achieve an AUC target of 400 to 600 
mg·h/L.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 17.  Based on an AUC target of 400 
mg·h/L (but potentially up to 600 
mg·hr/L, assuming a vancomycin 
MIC of ≤1 mg/L for MRSA) from 
adult data, the initial recommended 
vancomycin dosage for children with 
normal renal function and suspected 
serious MRSA infections (including 
pneumonia, pyomyositis, multifocal 
osteomyelitis, complicated bacte
-
remia, and necrotizing fasciitis) is:
 
•  60 to 80 mg/kg/day, in divided
 
doses given every 6 hours, for chil-
dren ages 3 months to less than 
12 years or
 
•
  60 to 70 mg/kg/day, in divided 
doses given every 6 to 8 hours, for 
those ≥12 years old
 (A-II).
The maximum empiric daily dose is 
usually 3,600  mg in children with ad-
equate renal function (C-III). Most 
children generally should not require 
more than 3,000  mg/day, and doses 
should be adjusted based on observed 
concentrations to achieve the AUC/MIC 
target. Early monitoring of observed 
concentrations is recommended when 
doses exceed 2,000 to 3,000 mg/day (A-
III). Furthermore, close monitoring of 
observed concentrations and renal func-
tion is prudent in patients with poor or 
augmented renal clearance, as resolu-
tion of their renal function abnormal-
ities may occur within the first 5 days of 
therapy.
 18.  AUC-guided therapeutic moni -
toring for vancomycin, preferably 
with Bayesian estimation, is sug-
gested for all pediatric age groups, 
based on developmental changes 
of vancomycin CL documented 
from the newborn to the adolescent. 
Based on current available data, 
the suggestion for AUC-guided 
monitoring in pediatrics aligns with 
the approach for adults, including 
the application of Bayesian esti-
mation for 1 trough concentration 
or first-order PK equations with 2 
concentrations (B-II). The Bayesian 
AUC-guided dosing strategy may be 
an optimal approach to individu-
alize vancomycin therapy in pediat-
rics since it can incorporate varying 
ages, weights, and renal function. 
Both serum concentrations of van-
comycin and renal function should 
be monitored since vancomycin CL 
and CLcr are not always well correl-
ated in pediatrics. Furthermore, ag-
gressive dosing to maintain target 
AUC exposure and decrease the 
risk of potential AKI in treatment 
of MRSA infection necessitates drug 
monitoring.
 19.
 Therapeutic monitoring may begin 
within 24 to 48 hours of vancomycin 
therapy for serious MRSA infections 
in children, as in adults
 (B-III). Any 
delay in therapeutic monitoring 
should be based on severity of infec-
tion and clinical judgment. Dosing 
adjustment should be made for those 
with renal insufficiency, those with 
obesity (see Pediatric Obesity), and 
those receiving concurrent nephro-
toxic drug therapy. Following the 
initial dose, dosing adjustment is 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  17
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
important for those with acute renal 
insufficiency, but subsequent adjust-
ment (particularly within the first 
5 days of therapy) may be necessary 
for those experiencing recovery of 
renal function. Sustained or subse-
quent decreases in dosage may be 
needed, particularly for those with 
chronic renal insufficiency and those 
receiving concurrent nephrotoxic 
drug therapy (B-III).
 20.
 Vancomycin exposure may be op
-
timally maintained below the thresh-
olds for AUC of 800 mg·h/L and for 
trough concentrations of 15 mg/L to 
minimize AKI (B-II). The safety of 
vancomycin dosages above 80 mg/
kg/day has not been prospectively 
evaluated. Avoiding vancomycin 
dosages of ≥100 mg/kg/day is sug-
gested since they are likely to surpass 
these thresholds (B-III).
 21.
 Insufficient data exist on which 
to base a recommendation for a 
loading dose among the nonobese 
pediatric population. Loading 
doses from adult studies may be 
considered, but further studies are 
needed to elucidate the appropriate 
dose for the various pediatric popu
-
lations from the neonate to adoles-
cent (C-III).
Pediatric obesity.   Vancomycin 
is a large glycopeptide molecule that 
is hydrophilic, suggesting that distri-
bution into tissues with high lipid con-
centrations, such as adipose tissue, is 
decreased, as noted above for adults 
(see Dosing in Obesity section). When 
vancomycin dosing is based on total 
body weight (mg/kg) for both obese 
and nonobese children, serum con-
centrations have been documented to 
be higher in obese children, assuming 
that renal CL is similar between the 2 
populations.179 Moffett retrospectively 
compared vancomycin pharmacoki-
netics in 24 obese children who were 
matched with 24 nonobese control 
children.180 Vancomycin dose admin-
istration per child was slightly higher 
in the obese children, which resulted 
in increased trough concentrations. 
Similarly, 2 retrospective non-Bayesian 
studies by Heble et  al 181 and Miller 
et al182 documented higher vancomycin 
trough concentrations in overweight 
and obese children, as compared to 
normal-weight children, with dosing 
based on total body weight. No increase 
in AKI was noted in the overweight 
children.182
Collectively, non-Bayesian studies 
of obese children have evaluated main-
tenance regimens ranging from 40 to 
80  mg/kg/day (calculated using total 
body weight), with some instituting 
maximum doses of 1 to 2 g over 1 to 2 
hours.180,181,183,184 As an alternative to 
total body weight, one study recom-
mended the use of body surface area to 
dose vancomycin, which necessitates 
establishing a different dosing regimen 
and obtaining height measurements 
that may not always be readily avail-
able in clinical practice. 185 Body sur -
face area is not typically used for dosing 
medications in children, except for 
chemotherapeutic agents.186
Using a Bayesian population-based 
PK analysis of 389 vancomycin serum 
concentrations collected from 87 
pairs of obese and nonobese children 
(matched by age and baseline SCr), Le 
and colleagues 187 showed that the V d 
was strongly correlated with actual or 
total body weight and that CL correl-
ated with allometric weight (ie, weight x  
0.75) and body surface area. Using this 
PK model, Nguyen and colleagues 164,166 
concluded, using Monte Carlo simu-
lations with Bayesian estimation, that 
vancomycin 60  mg/kg/day dosed by 
total body weight, as compared with 
other weight measures, resulted in the 
highest rate of achievement of the target 
AUC/MIC of ≥400 in obese children (ie, 
the target was achieved in 76% when 
vancomycin was given by total body 
weight, in 66% when given by adjusted 
body weight, and in 31% when given 
by allometric weight). Furthermore, 
when given dosages of vancomycin 
of 60  mg/kg/day by total body weight, 
fewer obese children of <12 vs ≥12 years 
of age achieved an AUC/MIC of ≥400 
(70% and 84%, respectively), an age-
based observation also identified in 
nonobese children. 164,166 Interestingly, 
the use of a 20-mg/kg loading dose 
based on total body weight in obese 
children increased achievement of an 
AUC/MIC of ≥400, especially within the 
first 12 hours of therapy. In addition, 1 
of every 5 obese children had an AUC 
of ≥ 800 mg·h/L, indicating that routine 
therapeutic and safety monitoring is 
prudent.188
Summary and 
recommendations:
 22.  Data suggest that obese children are  
likely to have vancomycin exposures 
that may be statistically greater than 
those in normal-weight children when 
doses are calculated on a mg/kg basis, 
but these differences are not known 
to be of sufficient clinical importance 
to suggest different mg/kg empiric 
vancomycin dosages in obese children 
at this time. Similar to nonobese chil-
dren, obese children < 12 years old, 
compared with those ≥ 12 years, may 
require a higher mg/kg dose (B-II).
 23.
 Therapeutic monitoring is likely to be 
of particular value in obese children, 
both for therapeutic response and 
the risk of AKI. The specific recom
-
mendations for therapeutic moni-
toring in nonobese children may also 
apply for obese children (B-II).
 24.
 A loading dose of 20 mg/kg by total 
body weight is recommended in 
obese children
 (A-III).
Neonates.   Vancomycin ther -
apeutic monitoring is important in 
neonates, based on developmental 
considerations of prominent increasing 
renal function that occurs over the 
first several weeks of life. 189 Models to 
predict vancomycin dosing have var -
iously incorporated weight-based 
dosing, chronologic age–based dosing, 
postmenstrual age–based dosing, SCr-
based dosing (except for the first week of 
life, when transplacental maternal cre-
atinine in the neonatal circulation ren-
ders neonatal SCr values inaccurate in 
estimating renal function), or combin-
ations of these strategies. Regardless of 
which model is used, therapeutic moni-
toring in the neonate is essential due to 
18  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
the rapid maturation of renal function 
over the first weeks of life.
Mehrotra et al190 compared 4 models 
for predicting vancomycin serum con-
centrations, based on their population 
PK model, using a standard weight-
based dose, a postmenstrual age–based 
dose, a postmenstrual and postnatal 
age–based dose, and a SCr-based dose. 
Serum creatinine–based dosing pre-
dicted trough concentrations with the 
smallest variability in both term and pre-
term neonates. However, for those who 
wish to achieve a target exposure based 
on high trough concentrations within a 
narrow range of 15 to 20 mg/L, it should 
be noted that only 13% to 21% of neo-
nates were within this range across the 
4 dosing regimens. Marqués-Miñana 
et  al191 also developed a population PK 
model and proposed dosing based on 
postmenstrual age. SCr-based rather 
than postmenstrual or postconceptional 
age–based dosing has been supported 
by Irikura et al192 and Capparelli et al.193 
However, when evaluating published 
neonatal PK models, no consensus on 
an optimal dosing regimen was achieved 
by experts on neonatal vancomycin, 
Zhao et  al reported. 194 After evaluating 
the predictive performance of 6 models, 
Zhao et al concluded the importance of 
evaluating analytical techniques for SCr 
and vancomycin concentrations best 
explained the variability of predictions 
between the models. Zhao et  al found 
that the Jaffé method overestimated SCr 
concentrations when compared to the 
enzymatic method and that for vanco-
mycin concentrations, the fluorescence 
polarization immunoassay method 
and enzyme-multiplied immunoassay 
method assays showed different predic-
tive performances as well.194
With the knowledge that AUC, as 
compared with trough concentrations, 
is a more achievable target in pediat -
rics, Frymoyer and colleagues 195 evalu-
ated the association between AUC and 
trough concentrations in neonates. 
Using 1,702 vancomycin concentrations 
(measured by the homogenous particle-
enhanced turbidimetric inhibition 
immunoassay) collected from 249 neo-
nates up to 3 months of age, population 
PK analysis was conducted to create 
a model for vancomycin CL that was 
based on weight, postmenstrual age, 
and SCr (measured by a modified ki-
netic Jaffé reaction). Monte Carlo 
simulations with Bayesian estimation 
demonstrated that trough concentra-
tions ranging from 7 to 11  mg/L were 
highly predictive of an AUC 24 of >400 
mg·h/L in at least 90% of neonates. 
Dosages to achieve this PK/PD target 
ranged from 15 to 20 mg/kg every 8 to 12 
hours, depending on postmenstrual age 
and SCr.194 Stockmann et al196 later sup-
ported the predictive performance and 
generalizability of this model in their 
study of 243 neonates with 734 vanco-
mycin concentrations. While a trough 
concentration of 11 mg/L predicted the 
attainment of an AUC of ≥400 mg·h/L 
in 93% of neonates, Stockmann and 
colleagues noted that a trough concen-
tration alone did not precisely predict 
AUC and concluded that Bayesian ap-
proaches to support vancomycin dosing 
decisions for neonates in the clinical 
setting are needed.196 Furthermore, Cies 
et  al197 reported differences in vanco-
mycin pharmacokinetics, in particular 
rapid vancomycin CL, in neonates with 
extracorporeal oxygenation life sup-
port, reiterating the need for Bayesian-
derived dosing decision support in this 
vulnerable population. Lastly, Leroux 
et al198 demonstrated the success of the 
clinical integration of a model-based 
vancomycin dosing calculator, devel-
oped from a population PK study, that 
was successful in improving the rate of 
attainment of a serum concentration of 
15 to 25 mg/L from 41% to 72% without 
any cases of AKI.
As an alternative to intermittent ad-
ministration, CI of vancomycin has been 
evaluated in infants. In a multicenter, 
randomized controlled trial involving 
111 infants less than 90 days of age, Gwee 
et al199 showed that the use of CI resulted 
in fewer dose adjustments and a lower 
mean daily dose than intermittent ad-
ministration. The target trough concen-
trations were 10 to 20 mg/L for II, and the 
steady-state concentrations were 15 to 
25 mg/L for CI. The AUC and clinical out-
comes, including nephrotoxicity, could 
not be evaluated rigorously in this study 
due to the small sample size. Overall, 
the clinical utility of CI in neonates re-
quires further evaluation, as the most 
common pathogen causing late-onset 
sepsis requiring vancomycin therapy is 
Staphylococcus epidermidis, with limited 
cases of S.  aureus sepsis. While the op-
timal AUC/MIC target for S. epidermidis 
is not well studied, a lower target may be 
reasonable, but further data to support 
this recommendation are needed.
The incidence of vancomycin-
associated AKI reported in neonates 
has been low, ranging from 1% to 
9%.200 Nonetheless, a positive correla-
tion between increasing vancomycin 
trough concentrations and AKI has 
been reported by Bhargava et  al. 201 
Furthermore, in a large, retrospec -
tive, multicenter, propensity score–
matched cohort study of 533 neonates 
receiving vancomycin and gentamicin 
and 533 receiving gentamicin alone, 
Constance et al 202 concluded that AKI 
was not associated with vancomycin 
alone but may occur in the presence 
of other recognized risk factors, in-
cluding patent ductus arteriosus, 
concomitant nonsteroidal anti-in-
flammatory drug use, 1 or more pos -
itive blood cultures, low birth weight, 
and higher scores for severity of ill-
ness and risk of mortality.
Summary and 
recommendations:
 25.  Doses recommended to achieve an 
AUC of 400 mg·h/L (assuming a MIC 
of 1 mg/L) in neonates and infants 
up to 3 months old range from 10 
to 20 mg/kg every 8 to 48 hours, 
depending on postmenstrual age, 
weight, and SCr
 (A-II). AUC-guided 
therapeutic dosing and monitoring, 
preferably with Bayesian estimation, 
can best achieve the target vanco-
mycin exposure likely to be required 
for a successful outcome of treat-
ment for a MRSA infection for all 
neonates, regardless of gestational 
and chronologic age. The specific 
recommendations for AUC-guided 
therapeutic monitoring in children 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  19
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
Table 2. Primary Recommendations for Vancomycin Dosing and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
A. ADULTS AND PEDIATRIC PATIENTS
1.
  In patients with suspected or definitive serious MRSA infections, an individualized tar
get AUC/MICBMD ratio of 400 to 600 (assuming a vancomycin MICBMD of 1 mg/L) should be 
advocated to achieve clinical efficacy while improving patient safety (A-II). 
2.
  When transitioning to AUC/MIC monitoring, clinicians should conservatively tar
get AUCs for patients with suspected or documented serious infections due to MRSA, assuming 
a vancomycin MICBMD of 1 mg/L or less at most institutions. Given the importance of early, appropriate therapy, vancomycin targeted exposure should be achieved early during 
the course of therapy, preferably within the first 24 to 48 hours (A-II). As such, the use of Bayesian-derived AUC monitoring may be prudent in these cases since it does not re-
quire steady-state serum vancomycin concentrations to allow for early assessment of AUC target attainment.
3.
  T
rough-only monitoring, with a target of 15 to 20 mg/L, is no longer recommended, based on efficacy and nephrotoxicity data in patients with serious infections due to MRSA 
(A-II). There is insufficient evidence to provide recommendations on whether trough-only or AUC-guided vancomycin monitoring should be used among patients with noninva-
sive MRSA or other infections. 
4.
  V
ancomycin monitoring is recommended for patients receiving vancomycin for serious MRSA infections to achieve a sustained targeted AUC (assuming a MICBMD of 1 mg/L 
unless it is known to be greater or less than 1 mg/L by BMD). Independent of MRSA infection, vancomycin monitoring is also recommended for all patients at high risk for 
nephrotoxicity (eg, critically ill patients receiving concurrent nephrotoxins), patients with unstable (ie, deteriorating or significantly improving) renal function, and those receiving 
prolonged courses of therapy (more than 3 to 5 days). We suggest the frequency of monitoring be based on clinical judgment; frequent or daily monitoring may be prudent for 
hemodynamically unstable patients (eg, those with end-stage renal disease), with once-weekly monitoring for hemodynamically stable patients (B-II). 
5.
  Based on curr
ent national vancomycin susceptibility surveillance data, under most circumstances for empiric dosing, the vancomycin MIC should be assumed to be 1 mg/L. 
When the MICBMD is greater than 1 mg/L, the probability of achieving an AUC/MIC target of ≥400 is low with conventional dosing; higher doses may risk unnecessary tox-
icity, and the decision to change therapy should be based on clinical judgment. In addition, when the MICBMD is less than 1 mg/L, we do not recommend decreasing the dose 
to achieve the AUC/MIC target. It is important to note the limitations in automated susceptibility testing methods, including the lack of precision and variability in MIC results 
depending on the method used (B-II).
6.
  The pharmacokinetics of continuous infusion suggest that such r
egimens may be a reasonable alternative to conventional intermittent infusion dosing when the AUC target 
cannot be achieved (B-II). 
7.
  Incompatibility of vancomycin with other drugs commonly coadminister
ed in the ICU requires the use of independent lines or multiple catheters when vancomycin is being con-
sidered for continuous infusion (A-III).
B.
  ADUL
TS
8.
  Given the narr
ow vancomycin AUC range for therapeutic effect and minimal associated risk of acute kidney injury (AKI), the most accurate and optimal way to manage vanco-
mycin dosing should be through AUC-guided dosing and monitoring (A-II). We recommend to accomplish this in one of two ways:  
a.
  One appr
oach relies on the collection of 2 concentrations (obtained near the steady-state, post-distributional peak concentration at 1 to 2 hours after infusion and trough at end 
of dosing interval), preferably but not required during the same dosing interval (if possible) and utilizing first-order pharmacokinetic (PK) equations to estimate the AUC (A-II).  
b.
  The pr
eferred approach to monitor AUC involves the use of Bayesian software programs, embedded with a PK model based on richly sampled vancomycin data as the 
Bayesian prior, to optimize the delivery of vancomycin based on the collection of 1 or 2 vancomycin concentrations, with at least 1 trough. It is preferred to obtain 2 PK samples 
(ie, 1 to 2 hours post infusion and at the end of the dosing interval) to estimate the AUC with the Bayesian approach (A-II). A trough concentration alone may be sufficient to 
estimate the AUC with the Bayesian approach in some patients, but more data across different patient populations are needed to confirm the viability of using trough-only data 
(B-II). 
9.
  Doses of 15 to 20 mg/kg (based on actual body weight) administer
ed every 8 to 12 hours as an intermittent infusion are recommended for most patients with normal renal func-
tion when assuming a MICBMD of 1 mg/L (A-II). In patients with normal renal function, these doses may not achieve therapeutic AUC/MIC targets when the MIC is 2 mg/L. 
Continued on next page
20  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
10.  Continuous Infusion:  Based on current available data, a loading dose of 15 to 20 mg/kg, followed by daily maintenance CI of 30 to 40 mg/kg (up to 60 mg/kg), to achieve a 
target steady-state concentration of 20 to 25 mg/L may be considered for critically ill patients (B-II). AUC24 can be simply calculated when multiplying the steady-state concen-
tration (ie, desired therapeutic range of 20 to 25 mg/L throughout the entire dosing interval) by a factor of 24 (B-II). Attaining the desired drug exposure may be more readily 
accomplished, given the ease of sampling time and dosage adjustment, by changing the rate of infusion, which is a highly desirable feature in critically ill patients (B-II).
11.
  The risk of developing nephr
otoxicity with CI appears to be similar or lower compared to intermittent dosing when targeting a steady-state concentration of 15 to 25 mg/L and 
a trough concentration of 10 to 20 mg/L, respectively (B-II). Definitive studies are needed to compare drug exposure based on measured AUC24 and factors that predispose to 
development of nephrotoxicity, such as receipt of concomitant nephrotoxins, diuretics, and/or vasopressor therapy in patients receiving continuous vs intermittent infusion of 
vancomycin. 
12.
  In or
der to achieve rapid attainment of targeted concentrations in critically ill patients with suspected or documented serious MRSA infections, a loading dose of 20 to 35 mg/
kg can be considered for intermittent administration of vancomycin (B-II). Loading doses should be based on actual body weight and not exceed 3,000 mg. More intensive 
and early therapeutic monitoring should also be performed in obese patients (B-II).
13.
  Adult Obesity:
 A vancomycin loading dose of 20 to 25 mg/kg using actual body weight, with a maximum of 3,000 mg, may be considered in obese adult patients with serious 
infections (B-II). Empiric maintenance doses for most obese patients usually do not exceed 4,500 mg/day, depending on their renal function (B-II). Early and frequent moni-
toring of AUC exposure is recommended for dose adjustment, especially when empiric doses exceed 4,000 mg/day (A-II).
14.
  Inter
mittent Hemodialysis: Since efficacy data are unavailable for an AUC of <400 mg · h/L, monitoring based on predialysis serum concentrations and extrapolating these 
values to estimate AUC is most practical. Maintaining predialysis concentrations between 15 and 20 mg/L is likely to achieve the AUC of 400 to 600 mg · h/L in the previous 
24 hours (C-III). Predialysis serum concentration monitoring should be performed not less than weekly and should drive subsequent dosing rather than a strict weight-based 
recommendation, although these recommended doses provide a useful starting point until serum concentrations have been determined (B-II). 
15.
  Hybrid Dialysis Therapies (eg, Slow-Low Efficiency Dialysis [SLED]): Loading doses of 20 to 25 mg/kg actual body weight should be used, r
ecognizing that these hybrid dialysis 
therapies efficiently remove vancomycin (B-III). Initial doses should not be delayed to wait for a dialysis treatment to end. Maintenance doses of 15 mg/kg should be given 
after hybrid hemodialysis ends or during the final 60 to 90 minutes of dialysis, as is done with standard hemodialysis (B-III). Concentration monitoring should guide further 
maintenance doses. 
16.
  Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy (CRRT): Loading doses of 20 to 25 mg/kg by actual body weight should be used in patients receiving CRRT at conventional, KDIGO-
recommended effluent rates of 20 to 25 mL/kg/h (B-II). Initial maintenance dosing for CRRT with effluent rates of 20 to 25 mL/kg/h should be 7.5 to 10 mg/kg every 12 hours (B-
II). Maintenance dose and dosing interval should be based on serum concentration monitoring, which should be conducted within the first 24 hours to ensure AUC/MIC targets 
are met. In fluid overloaded patients, doses may be reduced as patients become euvolemic and drug Vd decreases. The use of CI vancomycin in patients receiving CRRT ap-
pears to be growing, and this method could be used in place of intermittent vancomycin dosing, especially when high CRRT ultrafiltrate/dialysate flow rates are employed (B-II). 
C. PEDIATRIC PATIENTS
17.
  Based on an AUC tar
get of 400 mg · h/L (but potentially up to 600 mg · hr/L assuming a MIC of ≤1 mg/L) from adult data, the initial recommended vancomycin dosage for chil-
dren with normal renal function and suspected serious MRSA infections is 60 to 80 mg/kg/day, divided every 6 to 8 hours, for children ages 3 months and older (A-II). 
Continued from previous page
Table 2.
 Primary Recommendations for V
ancomycin Dosing and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
B.  ADUL TS
Continued on next page
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  21
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
18.  The maximum empiric daily dose is usually 3,600 mg/day in childr en with adequate renal function (C-III). Most children generally should not require more than 3,000 mg/day, 
and doses should be adjusted based on observed concentrations to achieve the AUC/MIC target. Early monitoring of observed concentrations is recommended when doses 
exceed 2,000 to 3,000 mg/day (A-III). Furthermore, close monitoring of observed concentrations and renal function is prudent in patients with poor or augmented renal clear-
ance as resolution of their renal function may occur within the first 5 days of therapy. 
19.
  AUC-guided therapeutic monitoring for vancomycin, pr
eferably with Bayesian estimation, is suggested for all pediatric age groups, based on developmental changes of vanco-
mycin CL documented from the newborn to the adolescent. Based on current available data, the suggestion for AUC-guided monitoring in pediatrics aligns with the approach 
for adults, including the application of Bayesian estimation for 1 trough concentration, or first-order PK equations with 2 concentrations (B-II). The Bayesian AUC-guided 
dosing strategy may be an optimal approach to individualize vancomycin therapy in pediatrics since it can incorporate varying ages, weights, and renal function. Both serum 
concentrations of vancomycin and renal function should be monitored since vancomycin CL and creatinine CL are not always well correlated in pediatrics. Furthermore, ag-
gressive dosing to maintain target AUC exposure and decrease the risk of potential AKI in treatment of MRSA infection necessitates drug monitoring. 
20.
  Therapeutic monitoring may begin within 24 to 48 hours of vancomycin therapy for serious MRSA infections in childr
en, as in adults (B-III). Any delay in therapeutic monitoring 
should be based on severity of infection and clinical judgment. Dosing adjustment should be made for those with renal insufficiency, or those with obesity, or for those re-
ceiving concurrent nephrotoxic drug therapy. Following the initial dose, dosing adjustment is important for those with acute renal insufficiency, but subsequent adjustment (par-
ticularly within the first 5 days of therapy) may be necessary for those experiencing recovery of renal function. Sustained or subsequent decreases in dosage may be needed, 
particularly for those with chronic renal insufficiency and those receiving concurrent nephrotoxic drug therapy (B-III). 
21.
  V
ancomycin exposure may be optimally maintained below the thresholds for AUC of 800 mg · h/L and for trough concentrations of 15 mg/L to minimize AKI (B-II). The safety 
of vancomycin above 80 mg/kg/day has not been prospectively evaluated. Avoiding vancomycin dosages of ≥100 mg/kg/day is suggested since they are likely to surpass 
these thresholds (B-III).
22.
  Insuf
ficient data exist on which to base a recommendation for a loading dose among the nonobese pediatric population. Loading doses from adult studies may be considered, 
but further studies are needed to elucidate the appropriate dose for the various pediatric populations, from neonates to adolescents (C-III).
23.
  Pediatric Obesity:
 Data suggest that obese children are likely to have vancomycin exposures that may be statistically greater than in normal-weight children when doses are 
calculated on a mg/kg basis, but these differences are not known to be of sufficient clinical importance to suggest different mg/kg empiric vancomycin dosages in obese chil-
dren at this time. Similar to nonobese children, obese children < 12 years old, compared with those ≥ 12 years, may require higher mg/kg doses (B-II). 
24.
  Pediatric Obesity:
 Therapeutic monitoring is likely to be of particular value in obese children, both for therapeutic response and to minimize the risk of AKI. The specific re-
commendations for therapeutic monitoring in nonobese children may also apply for obese children (B-II). A loading dose of 20 mg/kg by total body weight is recommended in 
obese children (A-III). 
25.
  Neonates:
 Dosages recommended to achieve an AUC of 400 mg · hr/L (assuming a MIC of 1 mg/L) in neonates and infants up to 3 months old range from 10 to 20 mg/kg 
every 8 to 48 hours depending on postmenstrual age, weight, and SCr (A-II). 
Abbreviations (not defined in body of table): AUC, area under the curve; BMD, broth micodilution; CL, clearance; ICU, intensive care unit; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes; MIC, 
minimum inhibitory concentration; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; SCr, serum creatinine; Vd, volume of distribution.
Continued from previous page
Table 2.
 Primary Recommendations for V
ancomycin Dosing and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
C. PEDIATRIC PATIENTS
22  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
should also apply for neonates (see 
recommendation 18, A-III).
Conclusion
To optimize vancomycin use for the 
treatment of serious infections caused 
by MRSA, we recommend targeting an 
AUC/MICBMD ratio of 400 to 600 (as -
suming an MIC BMD of 1  mg/L) for em-
piric dosing in both adult and pediatric 
patients to maximize clinical efficacy 
and minimize AKI risk. Furthermore, 
the AUC should be therapeutically 
monitored using 1 or 2 postdose con-
centrations (ie, a peak concentration 
measured after the early vancomycin 
tissue distribution phase and a trough 
level measured prior to the next dose), 
preferably integrating the Bayesian ap-
proach. The primary recommendations 
are summarized in Table  2. The suc -
cessful use of these guideline recom-
mendations to positively impact patient 
outcomes may require multifaceted 
interventions, including educational 
meetings, guideline implementation, 
and dissemination of educational ma-
terial on vancomycin dosing, moni-
toring, and nephrotoxicity. 203,204 While 
valuable literature pertaining to adults, 
children, and neonates has emerged 
since the last vancomycin guideline, 
future studies in all patient popula-
tions are necessary to address existing 
gaps, including (1) efficacy data to sup-
port vancomycin use in specific pa-
tient populations (including neonates 
and pediatric patients and patients 
with renal disease and obesity) and for 
other types of infections, (2) efficacy 
data for specific pathogens, including 
coagulase-negative staphylococcus 
and Streptococcus species; (3) robust 
pediatric efficacy data for MRSA and 
other gram-positive pathogens causing 
different types of serious infections; 
(4) optimal loading and maintenance 
dosing regimens for patients with obe-
sity and renal insufficiency; (5) efficacy 
benefit and the need for a dosing al-
gorithm (specifically incorporating a 
loading dose followed by maintenance 
infusion); and (6) toxicodynamics of 
vancomycin CI in critically ill patients.
Disclosures
Dr. Wong-Beringer received a grant from 
Merck & Co. and consulted for Rempex 
Pharmaceuticals, INSMED, Merck & Co., 
Nabriva Therapeutics, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Paratek Pharmaceuticals, Achaogen, Inc., 
Bayer HealthCare, and SIGA Technologies. 
Dr. Bradley served on a planning committee 
for the US Food and Drug Administration 
and European Medicines Agency at the 
American College of Clinical Pharmacy’s 
annual meeting; participated in the design 
of a a pediatric clinical trial; served on an 
executive committee for the United States 
Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility 
Testing; and consulted for Achaogen, 
Allergan, ContraFect, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Janssen, Melinta, Merck, Nabrive, Pfizer, 
Theravance, and Zavante. Dr. Liu received a 
research grant from Nohla Therapeutics and 
was a member of an Independent Efficacy 
Adjudication Committee with Theravance. 
Dr. Le received research awards from the 
Sternfels Prize for Drug Safety Innovation, 
Duke University, the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) and National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development, and JMI 
Laboratories; was an invited advisory board 
member for FDA, the Asian Pacific Health 
Foundation, and Infectious Diseases and 
Therapy journal. Dr. Levine served on the data 
safety monitoring board for Contrafect and 
served on an adjudication panel for Novartis. 
Dr. Lodise received grants from the Antibiotic 
Resistance Leadership Group (ARLG), Merck 
& Co, and Motif Bio PLC; served as a health 
outcomes project consultant for Paratek 
Pharmaceuticals, Allergan, Merck & Co., 
and Melinta Therapeutics; served on advi -
sory boards for Paratek Pharmaceuticals, 
M
otif Bio PLC, Achaogen, Nabriva, and 
Tetraphase; served as a consultant to Paratek 
Pharmaceuticals, ARLG, Allergan, Merck & 
Co., Melinta Therapeutics, Motif Bio PLC, 
Achaogen, Nabriva, and Tetraphase; and 
was a speaker for Melinta Therapeutics, 
Tetraphase, and Sunovion. Dr. Maples served 
as an international working group member 
for the European Cystic Fibrosis Society and 
North American Cystic Fibrosis Society, 
served on an advisory panel for the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention and Pew 
Charitable Trust, and was on a committee for 
the Arkansas Health Department. Dr. Mueller 
received research grants from Merck & Co. 
and Hope Pharmaceutical and served on an 
advisory board for NxStage and Baxter. Dr. 
Pai received a grant from Merck, Inc., served 
on an advisory board for Shinogi and Paratek 
Pharmaceuticals, and served on the meet the 
professor program for Merck. Dr. Rodvold re-
ceived a grant from Theravance Biopharm, 
NIH, ARL
G, and Allergan; consulted for BLC, 
Entasis, Merck, Paratek Pharmaceuticals, 
Shionogi, Tetraphase, and Wockhardt; 
was a speaker at the American Society for 
Microbiology and European Society for 
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 
ASM/ESCMID conference; served on the 2015–
2019 Program Committee and was 2016–2018 
Program Co-Chairperson for the American 
Microbiology Society; and was a member 
of the 2017–2019 Antimicrobial Resistance 
Committee for IDSA. Dr. Rybak received re -
search grants from Bayer Pharmaceuticals, the 
NIH R
esearch Project Grant (RO1) Program, 
Merck, Allergan, the Michigan Department 
of Health and Human Services, Accelerate 
Diagnostics, Inc., NIH, Contrafect, Motif 
Biosciences, and the Michigan Translational 
Research and Commercialization Program; 
and served as a grant review panel member 
for NIH. The other authors have declared no 
potential conflicts of interest.
References
1. R ybak MJ, Lomaestro BM, 
Rotschafer JC, et al. Therapeutic moni-
toring of vancomycin in adult patients: 
a consensus review of the American 
Society of Health-System Pharmacists, 
the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America, and the Society of Infectious 
Diseases Pharmacists. Am J Health-Syst 
Pharm. 2009; 66(1):82-98.
2.
 The p
eriodic health examination. 
Canadian Task Force on the Periodic 
Health Examination. Can Med Assoc J. 
1979; 121(9):1193-1254.
3.
 Cr
aig WA. Basic pharmacodynamics 
of antibacterials with clinical appli-
cations to the use of beta-lactams, 
glycopeptides, and linezolid. 
Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2003; 
17(3):479-501.
4.
 Dr
usano GL. Antimicrobial pharma-
codynamics: critical interactions of 
‘bug and drug’ . Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004; 
2(4):289-300.
5.
 L
iu C, Bayer A, Cosgrove SE, Daum RS 
et al. Clinical practice guidelines by The 
Infectious Diseases Society of America 
for the treatment of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
infections in adults and children: execu-
tive summary. Clin Infect Dis. 2011; 
52(3):285-292.
6.
 R
ybak MJ. The pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic properties of van-
comycin. Clin Infect Dis. 2006; 42(Suppl 
1):S35-S39.
7.
 K
ullar R, Leonard SN, Davis SL et al. 
Validation of the effectiveness of a van-
comycin nomogram in achieving target 
trough concentrations of 15-20 mg/L 
suggested by the vancomycin con-
sensus guidelines. Pharmacotherapy. 
2011; 31(5):441-448.
8.
 S
ingh NB, Yim J, Jahanbakhsh S, 
Sakoulas G, Rybak MJ. Impact of 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  23
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
cefazolin co-administration with 
vancomycin to reduce develop-
ment of vancomycin-intermediate 
Staphylococcus aureus. Diagn Microbiol 
Infect Dis. 2018; 91(4):363-370.
9.
 V
idaillac C, Gardete S, Tewhey R 
et al. Alternative mutational path-
ways to intermediate resistance to 
vancomycin in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus . J Infect Dis.  
2013; 208(1):67-74.
10.
 M
oise-Broder PA, Forrest A, 
Birmingham MC, Schentag JJ. 
Pharmacodynamics of vancomycin and 
other antimicrobials in patients with 
Staphylococcus aureus lower respiratory 
tract infections. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2004; 43(13):925-942.
11.
 K
ullar R, Davis SL, Levine DP , Rybak MJ. 
Impact of vancomycin exposure on 
outcomes in patients with methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacte-
remia: support for consensus guidelines 
suggested targets. Clin Infect Dis. 2011; 
52(8):975-981.
12.
 Br
own J, Brown K, Forrest A. 
Vancomycin AUC24/MIC ratio in pa-
tients with complicated bacteremia 
and infective endocarditis due to 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus and its association with attrib-
utable mortality during hospitalization. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012; 
56(2):634-638.
13.
 H
olmes NE, Turnidge JD, Munckhof WJ 
et al. Vancomycin AUC/MIC ratio 
and 30-day mortality in patients with 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013; 
57(4):1654-1663.
14.
 G
awronski KM, Goff DA, Brown J, 
Khadem TM, Bauer KA. A steward-
ship program’s retrospective evalua-
tion of vancomycin AUC 24/MIC and 
time to microbiological clearance in 
patients with methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus  bacteremia 
and osteomyelitis. Clin Ther. 2013; 
35(6):772-779.
15.
 J
ung Y, Song KH, Cho Je et al. Area 
under the concentration-time curve 
to minimum inhibitory concentra-
tion ratio as a predictor of vancomycin 
treatment outcome in methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacter-
aemia. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2014; 
43(2):179-183.
16.
 L
odise TP , Drusano GL, Zasowski E 
et al. Vancomycin exposure in pa-
tients with methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus  bloodstream 
infections: how much is enough? Clin 
Infect Dis. 2014; 59(5):666-675.
17.
 C
asapao AM, Lodise TP , Davis SL et al. 
Association between vancomycin day 1 
exposure profile and outcomes among 
patients with methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus infective endo-
carditis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2015; 59(6):2978-2985.
18.
 M
ogle BT , Steele JM, Seabury RW, 
Dang UJ, Kufel WD. Implementation of 
a two-point pharmacokinetic AUC-
based vancomycin therapeutic drug 
monitoring approach in patients with 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus bacteraemia. Int J Antimicrob 
Agents. 2018; 52(6):805-810.
19.
 L
e J, Ny P , Capparelli E et al. 
Pharmacodynamic characteristics of 
nephrotoxicity associated with vanco-
mycin use in children. J Pediatric Infect 
Dis Soc. 2015; 4(4):e109-e116.
20.
 F
inch NA, Zasowski EJ, Murray KP 
et al. A quasi-experiment to study the 
impact of vancomycin area under 
the concentration-time curve-guided 
dosing on vancomycin-associated neph-
rotoxicity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2017; 61(12):e01293-17.
21.
 Z
asowski EJ, Murray KP , Trinh TD et al. 
Identification of vancomycin exposure-
toxicity thresholds in hospitalized 
patients receiving intravenous vanco-
mycin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2018; 62(1):e01684-17.
22.
 N
eely MN, Kato L, Youn G et al. 
Prospective trial on the use of trough 
concentration versus area under the 
curve to determine therapeutic van-
comycin dosing. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2018; 62(2):e02042-17.
23.
 L
odise TP , Rosenkranz SL, Finnemeyer M 
et al. The emperor’s new clothes: pro-
spective observational evaluation of the 
association between initial vancomycin 
exposure and failure rates among adult 
hospitalized patients with MRSA blood-
stream infections (PROVIDE) [published 
online ahead of print June 3, 2019]. Clin 
Infect Dis. doi.10.1093/cid/ciz460.
24.
 N
eely MN, Youn G, Jones B et al. 
Are vancomycin trough concentra-
tions adequate for optimal dosing? 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014; 
58(1):309-316.
25.
 L
esar TS, Rotschafer JC, Strand LM, 
Zolem LD, Zaske DE. Gentamicin 
dosing errors with four commonly 
used nomograms. JAMA. 1982; 
248(10):1190-1193.
26.
 P
atel N, Pai MP , Rodvold KA, 
Lomaestro B, Drusano GL, Lodise TP . 
Vancomycin: we can’t get there 
from here. Clin Infect Dis. 2011; 
52(8):969-974.
27.
 M
ehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV et al.; 
Acute Kidney Injury Network. Acute 
Kidney Injury Network: report of an 
initiative to improve outcomes in 
acute kidney injury. Crit Care. 2007; 
11(2):R31.
28.
 R
oy AK, Mc Gorrian C, Treacy C et al. 
A comparison of traditional and novel 
definitions (RIFLE, AKIN, and KDIGO) 
of acute kidney injury for the prediction 
of outcomes in acute decompensated 
heart failure. Cardiorenal Med. 2013; 
3(1):26-37.
29.
 v
an Hal SJ, Paterson DL, Lodise TP . 
Systematic review and meta-analysis 
of vancomycin-induced nephrotoxicity 
associated with dosing schedules that 
maintain troughs between 15 and 20 
milligrams per liter. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2013; 57(2):734-744.
30.
 S
inha Ray A, Haikal A, Hammoud KA, 
Yu AS. Vancomycin and the risk of 
AKI: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016; 
11(12):2132-2140.
31.
 S
ingbartl K, Kellum JA. AKI in the ICU: 
definition, epidemiology, risk stratifi-
cation, and outcomes. Kidney Int. 2012; 
81(9):819-825.
32.
 L
inder A, Fjell C, Levin A, Walley KR, 
Russell JA, Boyd JH. Small acute in-
creases in serum creatinine are associ-
ated with decreased long-term survival 
in the critically ill. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2014; 189(9):1075-81.
33.
 S
uzuki Y, Kawasaki K, Sato Y et al. Is 
peak concentration needed in thera-
peutic drug monitoring of vancomycin? 
A pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic 
analysis in patients with methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
pneumonia. Chemotherapy. 2012; 
58(4):308-312.
34.
 L
odise TP , Patel N, Lomaestro BM, 
Rodvold KA, Drusano GL. Relationship 
between initial vancomycin 
concentration-time profile and neph-
rotoxicity among hospitalized patients. 
Clin Infect Dis. 2009; 49(4):507-514.
35.  Alj efri DM, Avedissian SN, Rhodes NJ, 
Postelnick MJ, Nguyen K, Scheetz MH. 
Vancomycin area under the curve and 
acute kidney injury: a meta-analysis. 
Clin Infect Dis. 2019; 69(11):1881-1887.
36.
 A
vedissian SN, Pais GM, O’Donnell JN 
et al. Twenty-four hour pharmaco-
kinetic relationships for intravenous 
vancomycin and novel urinary bio-
markers of acute kidney injury in a rat 
model. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2019; 
74(8):2326-2334.
37.
 Rho
des NJ, Prozialeck WC, Lodise TP 
et al. Evaluation of vancomycin expos-
ures associated with elevations in novel 
urinary biomarkers of acute kidney 
injury in vancomycin-treated rats. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016; 
60(10):5742-5751.
38.
 L
odise TP , Graves J, Evans A et al. 
Relationship between vancomycin 
MIC and failure among patients with 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
24  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
aureus bacteremia treated with vanco-
mycin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2008; 52(9):3315-3320.
39.
 T
ong SYC, Lye DC, Yahav D, et al; for 
Australasian Society for Infectious 
Diseases Clinical Research Network. 
Effect of vancomycin or daptomycin 
with vs without an antistaphylococcal 
β-lactam on mortality, bacteremia, 
relapse, or treatment failure in pa-
tients with MRSA bacteremia: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2020; 
323(6):527-537.
40.
 M
oenster RP , Linneman TW, 
Finnegan PM, Hand S, Thomas Z, 
McDonald JR. Acute renal failure 
associated with vancomycin and 
beta-lactams for the treatment of 
osteomyelitis in diabetics: piperacillin-
tazobactam as compared with 
cefepime. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014; 
20(6):O384-O389.
41.
 G
omes DM, Smotherman C, Birch A 
et al. Comparison of acute kidney 
injury during treatment with van-
comycin in combination with 
piperacillin-tazobactam or cefepime. 
Pharmacotherapy. 2014; 34(7):662-669.
42.
 B
urgess LD, Drew RH. Comparison 
of the incidence of vancomycin-
induced nephrotoxicity in hospi-
talized patients with and without 
concomitant piperacillin-tazobactam. 
Pharmacotherapy. 2014; 34(7):670-676.
43.
 N
avalkele B, Pogue JM, Karino S et al. 
Risk of acute kidney injury in patients 
on concomitant vancomycin and 
piperacillin-tazobactam compared to 
those on vancomycin and cefepime. 
Clin Infect Dis. 2017; 64(2):116-123.
44.
 K
arino S, Kaye KS, Navalkele B 
et al. Epidemiology of acute kidney 
injury among patients receiving 
concomitant vancomycin and 
piperacillin-tazobactam: opportun-
ities for antimicrobial stewardship. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016; 
60(6):3743-3750.
45.
 L
odise TP , Lomaestro B, Graves J, 
Drusano GL. Larger vancomycin doses 
(at least four grams per day) are as-
sociated with an increased incidence 
of nephrotoxicity. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2008; 52(4):1330-1336.
46.
 M
inejima E, Choi J, Beringer P , Lou M, 
Tse E, Wong-Beringer A. Applying new 
diagnostic criteria for acute kidney 
injury to facilitate early identification of 
nephrotoxicity in vancomycin-treated 
patients. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2011; 55(7):3278-3283.
47.
 C
ano EL, Haque NZ, Welch VL, et al. 
Incidence of nephrotoxicity and as-
sociation with vancomycin use in 
intensive care unit patients with pneu-
monia: retrospective analysis of the 
IMPACT-HAP Database. Clin Ther. 2012; 
34(1):149-157.
48.
 V
ance-Bryan K, Rotschafer JC, 
Gilliland SS, Rodvold KA, 
Fitzgerald CM, Guay DR. A compar-
ative assessment of vancomycin-
associated nephrotoxicity in the 
young versus the elderly hospitalized 
patient. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1994; 
33(4):811-821.
49.
 J
effres MN, Isakow W, Doherty JA, 
Micek ST , Kollef MH. A retrospec-
tive analysis of possible renal tox-
icity associated with vancomycin in 
patients with health care-associated 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus pneumonia. Clin Ther. 2007; 
29(6):1107-1115.
50.
 F
ullmer A, McCue D, Feng C. 
Retrospective review of vancomycin-
induced nephrotoxicity in patients with 
leukemia. J Oncol Pharm Pract. 2014; 
20(6):403-408.
51.
 C
hung J, Oh JM, Cho EM et al. Optimal 
dose of vancomycin for treating 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus pneumonia in critically ill pa-
tients. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2011; 
39(6):1030-1037.
52.
 H
ermsen ED, Hanson M, 
Sankaranarayanan J, Stoner JA, 
Florescu MC, Rupp ME. Clinical outcomes 
and nephrotoxicity associated with vanco-
mycin trough concentrations during treat-
ment of deep-seated infections. Expert 
Opin Drug Saf. 2010; 9(1):9-14.
53.
 H
idayat LK, Hsu DI, Quist R, 
Shriner KA, Wong-Beringer A. 
High-dose vancomycin therapy for 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus infections: efficacy and 
toxicity. Arch Intern Med. 2006; 
166(19):2138-2144.
54.
 Kr
alovicová K, Spanik S, Halko J et al. 
Do vancomycin serum levels predict 
failures of vancomycin therapy or 
nephrotoxicity in cancer patients? J 
Chemother. 1997; 9(6):420-426.
55.
 Z
immermann AE, Katona BG, 
Plaisance KI. Association of vanco-
mycin serum concentrations with out -
comes in patients with gram-positive 
bacteremia. Pharmacotherapy. 1995; 
15(1):85-91.
56.
 M
ohr JF , Murray BE. Point: vancomycin 
is not obsolete for the treatment of in-
fection caused by methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus. Clin Infect Dis. 
2007; 44(12):1536-1542.
57.
 P
ai MP , Neely M, Rodvold KA, 
Lodise TP . Innovative approaches to op-
timizing the delivery of vancomycin in 
individual patients. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 
2014; 77:50-57.
58.
 Di
az R, Afreixo V , Ramalheira E, 
Rodrigues C, Gago B. Evaluation of 
vancomycin MIC creep in methi-
cillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
infections—a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Clin Microbiol Infect. 
2017; 24(2):97-104.
59.
 Di
az R, Ramalheira E, Afreixo V , Gago B. 
Evaluation of vancomycin MIC creep in 
Staphylococcus aureus infections. J Glob 
Antimicrob Resist. 2017; 10:281-284.
60.
 S
ader HS, Farrell DJ, Flamm RK, 
Jones RN. Activity of ceftaroline and 
comparator agents tested against 
Staphylococcus aureus from patients 
with bloodstream infections in US 
medical centres (2009-13). J Antimicrob 
Chemother. 2015; 70(7):2053-2056.
61.
 Pfaller MA
, Sader HS, Flamm RK, 
Castanheira M, Smart JI, Mendes RE. In 
vitro activity of telavancin against clini-
cally important gram-positive pathogens 
from 69 U.S. medical centers (2015): po-
tency analysis by U.S. Census Divisions. 
Microb Drug Resist. 2017; 23(6):718-726.
62.
 D
uncan LR, Sader HS, Smart JI, 
Flamm RK, Mendes RE. Telavancin 
activity in vitro tested against a world-
wide collection of gram-positive clinical 
isolates (2014). J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 
2017; 10:271-276.
63.
 M
outon JW, Meletiadis J, Voss A, 
Turnidge J. Variation of MIC measure-
ments: the contribution of strain and 
laboratory variability to measurement 
precision. J Antimicrob Chemother. 
2018; 73(9):2374-2379.
64.
 H
eil EL, Claeys KC, Mynatt RP et al. 
Making the change to area under the 
curve-based vancomycin dosing. 
Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2018; 
75(24):1986-1995.
65.
 J
elliffe RW, Schumitzky A. Modeling, 
adaptive control, and optimal drug 
therapy. Med Prog Technol. 1990; 
16(1-2):95-110.
66.
 B
ayard DS, Jelliffe RW. A Bayesian 
approach to tracking patients having 
changing pharmacokinetic parameters. 
J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2004; 
31(1):75-107.
67.
 F
uchs A, Csajka C, Thoma Y, Buclin T , 
Widmer N. Benchmarking therapeutic 
drug monitoring software: a review 
of available computer tools. Clin 
Pharmacokinet. 2013; 52(1):9-22.
68.
 T
urner RB, Kojiro K, Shephard EA et al. 
Review and validation of Bayesian 
dose-optimizing software and equa-
tions for calculation of the vancomycin 
area under the curve in critically ill 
patients. Pharmacotherapy. 2018; 
38(12):1174-1183.
69.
 Al-
Sulaiti FK, Nader AM, Saad MO et al. 
Clinical and pharmacokinetic outcomes 
of peak-trough-based versus trough-based 
vancomycin therapeutic drug monitoring 
approaches: a pragmatic randomized 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  25
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
controlled trial. Eur J Drug Metab 
Pharmacokinet. 2019; 44(5):639-652.
70.
 B
egg EJ, Barclay ML, Duffull SB. A 
suggested approach to once-daily 
aminoglycoside dosing. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 1995; 39(6):605-609.
71.
 B
auer LA. Applied Clinical 
Pharmacokinetics. 2nd ed. New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill Medical; 2008.
72.
 B
eringer P . Winter’s Basic Clinical 
Pharmacokinetics. 6th ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2018.
73.
 M
arsot A, Boulamery A, Bruguerolle B, 
Simon N. Vancomycin: a review of pop-
ulation pharmacokinetic analyses. Clin 
Pharmacokinet. 2012; 51(1):1-13.
74.
 L
odise TP , McKinnon PS, Swiderski L, 
Rybak MJ. Outcomes analysis of 
delayed antibiotic treatment for 
hospital-acquired Staphylococcus au-
reus bacteremia. Clin Infect Dis. 2003; 
36(11):1418-1423.
75.
 Di
az R, Afreixo V , Ramalheira E, 
Rodrigues C, Gago B. Evaluation of 
vancomycin MIC creep in methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
infections-a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Clin Microbiol Infect. 
2018; 24(2):97-104.
76.
 Diek
ema DJ, Pfaller MA, Shortridge D, 
Zervos M, Jones RN. Twenty-year 
trends in antimicrobial susceptibilities 
among Staphylococcus aureus from the 
SENTRY antimicrobial surveillance 
program. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2019; 
6(suppl 1):S47-S53.
77.
 Kr
uzel MC, Lewis CT , Welsh KJ et al. 
Determination of vancomycin and 
daptomycin MICs by different testing 
methods for methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus. J Clin Microbiol. 
2011; 49(6):2272-2273.
78.
 H
su DI, Hidayat LK, Quist R et al. 
Comparison of method-specific vanco-
mycin minimum inhibitory concentra-
tion values and their predictability for 
treatment outcome of meticillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections. 
Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2008; 32(5):378-385.
79.
 R
ybak MJ, Vidaillac C, Sader HS et al. 
Evaluation of vancomycin suscepti-
bility testing for methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus: comparison 
of etest and three automated testing 
methods. J Clin Microbiol. 2013; 
51(7):2077-2081.
80.
 W
ysocki M, Delatour F , Faurisson F 
et al. Continuous versus intermit-
tent infusion of vancomycin in severe 
staphylococcal infections: prospec-
tive multicenter randomized study. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2001; 
45(9):2460-2467.
81.
 S
chmelzer TM, Christmas AB, 
Norton HJ, Heniford BT , Sing RF . 
Vancomycin intermittent dosing versus 
continuous infusion for treatment 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in trauma patients. Am Surg. 2013; 
79(11):1185-1190.
82.
 T
afelski S, Nachtigall I, Troeger U, et al. 
Observational clinical study on the 
effects of different dosing regimens on 
vancomycin target levels in critically ill 
patients: continuous versus intermittent 
application. J Infect Public Health. 2015; 
8(4):355-363.
83.
 H
utschala D, Kinstner C, Skhirdladze K, 
Thalhammer F , Muller M, Tschernko E. 
Influence of vancomycin on renal func-
tion in critically ill patients after cardiac 
surgery: continuous versus intermit-
tent infusion. Anesthesiology. 2009; 
111(2):356-365.
84.
 Ak
ers KS, Cota JM, Chung KK, Renz EM, 
Mende K, Murray CK. Serum vanco-
mycin levels resulting from continuous 
or intermittent infusion in critically ill 
burn patients with or without contin-
uous renal replacement therapy. J Burn 
Care Res. 2012; 33(6):e254-e262.
85.
 S
augel B, Nowack MC, Hapfelmeier A et al. 
Continuous intravenous administration of 
vancomycin in medical intensive care unit 
patients. J Crit Care. 2013; 28(1):9-13.
86.
 H
anrahan TP , Harlow G, Hutchinson J 
et al. Vancomycin-associated 
nephrotoxicity in the critically ill: a 
retrospective multivariate regres -
sion analysis*. Crit Care Med. 2014; 
42(12):2527-2536.
87.
 V
uagnat A, Stern R, Lotthe A et al. 
High dose vancomycin for osteomy-
elitis: continuous vs. intermittent 
infusion. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2004; 
29(4):351-357.
88.
 I
ngram PR, Lye DC, Fisher DA, Goh WP , 
Tam VH. Nephrotoxicity of contin-
uous versus intermittent infusion of 
vancomycin in outpatient parenteral 
antimicrobial therapy. Int J Antimicrob 
Agents. 2009; 34(6):570-574.
89.
 V
errall AJ, Llorin R, Tam VH et al. 
Efficacy of continuous infusion of van-
comycin for the outpatient treatment of 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus au-
reus infections. J Antimicrob Chemother. 
2012; 67(12):2970-2973.
90.
 I
ngram PR, Lye DC, Tambyah PA, 
Goh WP , Tam VH, Fisher DA. Risk 
factors for nephrotoxicity associated 
with continuous vancomycin infusion 
in outpatient parenteral antibiotic 
therapy. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2008; 
62(1):168-171.
91.
 D
ubée V , Zeller V , Lhotellier L et al. 
Continuous high-dose vancomycin 
combination therapy for methicillin-
resistant staphylococcal prosthetic 
hip infection: a prospective cohort 
study. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2013; 
19(2):E98-E105.
92.   R averdy V , Ampe E, Hecq JD, 
Tulkens PM. Stability and compat-
ibility of vancomycin for admin-
istration by continuous infusion. 
J Antimicrob Chemother. 2013; 
68(5):1179-1182.
93.
  W
ade J, Cooper M, Ragan R. Simulated 
Y-site compatibility of vancomycin 
and piperacillin-tazobactam. Hosp 
Pharm. 2015; 50(5):376-379.
94.
  de W
aele JJ, Danneels I, Depuydt P , 
Decruyenaere J, Bourgeois M, Hoste E. 
Factors associated with inadequate 
early vancomycin levels in critically 
ill patients treated with continuous 
infusion. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2013; 
41(5):434-438.
95.
  O
campos-Martinez E, Penaccini L, 
Scolletta S et al. Determinants of early 
inadequate vancomycin concentra-
tions during continuous infusion 
in septic patients. Int J Antimicrob 
Agents. 2012; 39(4):332-337.
96.
  M
ohammedi I, Descloux E, Argaud L, 
Le Scanff J, Robert D. Loading dose of 
vancomycin in critically ill patients: 
15 mg/kg is a better choice than 
500 mg. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2006; 
27(3):259-262.
97.
  L
i J, Udy AA, Kirkpatrick CM, Lipman J, 
Roberts JA. Improving vancomycin 
prescription in critical illness through 
a drug use evaluation process: a 
weight-based dosing intervention 
study. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2012; 
39(1):69-72.
98.
  P
ea F , Furlanut M, Negri C et al. 
Prospectively validated dosing nomo-
grams for maximizing the pharmaco-
dynamics of vancomycin administered 
by continuous infusion in critically 
ill patients. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2009; 53(5):1863-1867.
99.
  R
oberts JA, Taccone FS, Udy AA, 
Vincent JL, Jacobs F , Lipman J. 
Vancomycin dosing in critically ill 
patients: robust methods for im-
proved continuous-infusion regimens. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011; 
55(6):2704-2709.
100.
 Tr
uong J, Levkovich BJ, Padiglione AA. 
Simple approach to improving van-
comycin dosing in intensive care: a 
standardised loading dose results in 
earlier therapeutic levels. Intern Med J. 
2012; 42(1):23-29.
101.
 W
ang JT , Fang CT , Chen YC, Chang SC. 
Necessity of a loading dose when 
using vancomycin in critically ill pa-
tients. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2001; 
47(2):246.
102.
 B
arth RH, DeVincenzo N. Use 
of vancomycin in high-flux he-
modialysis: experience with 130 
courses of therapy. Kidney Int. 1996; 
50(3):929-936.
26  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
103. Br own M, Polisetty R, Gracely EJ, 
Cuhaci B, Schlecht HP . Weight-based 
loading of vancomycin in patients on 
hemodialysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2011; 
53(2):164-166.
104.
 V
andecasteele SJ, de Bacquer D, 
de Vriese AS. Implementation of a dose 
calculator for vancomycin to achieve 
target trough levels of 15-20 microg/mL 
in persons undergoing hemodialysis. 
Clin Infect Dis. 2011; 53(2):124-129.
105.
 C
ovajes C, Scolletta S, Penaccini L 
et al. Continuous infusion of vanco-
mycin in septic patients receiving 
continuous renal replacement 
therapy. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2013; 
41(3):261-266.
106.
 D
ecker BS, Kays MB, Chambers M, 
Kraus MA, Moe SM, Sowinski KM. 
Vancomycin pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics during short daily 
hemodialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2010; 5(11):1981-1987.
107.
 Alfand
ari S, Levent T , Descamps D 
et al. Evaluation of glycopeptide use in 
nine French hospitals. Med Mal Infect. 
2010; 40(4):232-237.
108.
 H
ochart C, Berthon C, Corm S et al. 
Vancomycin serum concentration 
during febrile neutropenia in patients 
with acute myeloid leukemia. Med Mal 
Infect. 2011; 41(12):652-656.
109.
 L
emaire X, Loiez C, Valette M et al. 
Comparison of vancomycin and 
teicoplanin trough serum levels in 
patients with infected orthopedic 
devices: new data for old therapies. J 
Infect Chemother. 2011; 17(3):370-374.
110.
 Gr
ace E. Altered vancomycin phar-
macokinetics in obese and morbidly 
obese patients: what we have learned 
over the past 30 years. J Antimicrob 
Chemother. 2012; 67(6):1305-1310.
111.
 B
louin RA, Bauer LA, Miller DD, 
Record KE, Griffen WO Jr. Vancomycin 
pharmacokinetics in normal 
and morbidly obese subjects. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1982; 
21(4):575-580.
112.
 Cr
ass RL, Dunn R, Hong J, Krop LC, 
Pai MP . Dosing vancomycin in the 
super obese: less is more. J Antimicrob 
Chemother. 2018; 73(11):3081-3086.
113.
 C
linical guidelines on the identifi-
cation, evaluation, and treatment 
of overweight and obesity in adults: 
executive summary. Expert Panel on 
the Identification, Evaluation, and 
Treatment of Overweight in Adults. 
Am J Clin Nutr. 1998; 68(4):899-917.
114.
 P
astor PN, Reuben C, Xia H. 
Chartbook on Trends in the Health of 
Americans. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics; 2002.
115.
 H
ales CM, Carroll MD, Fryar CD, 
Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesity 
among adults and youth: United 
States, 2015–2016. NCHS Data Brief. 
2017; (288):1-8.
116.
 C
hoi YC, Saw S, Soliman D et al. 
Intravenous vancomycin associated 
with the development of nephro-
toxicity in patients with class III 
obesity. Ann Pharmacother. 2017; 
51(11):937-944.
117.
 V
ance-Bryan K, Guay DR, Gilliland SS, 
Rodvold KA, Rotschafer JC. Effect of 
obesity on vancomycin pharmaco-
kinetic parameters as determined by 
using a Bayesian forecasting tech-
nique. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
1993; 37(3):436-440.
118.
 D
ucharme MP , Slaughter RL, 
Edwards DJ. Vancomycin pharma-
cokinetics in a patient population: 
effect of age, gender, and body 
weight. Ther Drug Monit. 1994; 
16(5):513-518.
119.
 B
auer LA, Black DJ, Lill JS. 
Vancomycin dosing in morbidly obese 
patients. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1998; 
54(8):621-625.
120.
 A
dane ED, Herald M, Koura F . 
Pharmacokinetics of vancomycin in 
extremely obese patients with sus-
pected or confirmed Staphylococcus 
aureus infections. Pharmacotherapy. 
2015; 35(2):127-139.
121.
 H
ong J, Krop LC, Johns T , Pai MP . 
Individualized vancomycin dosing in 
obese patients: a two-sample meas-
urement approach improves target 
attainment. Pharmacotherapy. 2015; 
35(5):455-463.
122.
 P
ai MP . Drug dosing based on weight 
and body surface area: mathemat-
ical assumptions and limitations in 
obese adults. Pharmacotherapy. 2012; 
32(9):856-868.
123.
 C
ockcroft DW, Gault MH. Prediction 
of creatinine clearance from serum 
creatinine. Nephron. 1976; 16(1):31-41.
124.
 M
atzke GR, Aronoff GR, Atkinson AJ 
Jr et al. Drug dosing consideration 
in patients with acute and chronic 
kidney disease-a clinical update from 
Kidney Disease Improving Global 
Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int. 2011; 
80(11):1122-1137.
125.
 R
odvold KA, Blum RA, Fischer JH 
et al. Vancomycin pharmacokinetics 
in patients with various degrees of 
renal function. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 1988; 32(6):848-852.
126.
 P
ai MP , Hong J, Krop L. Peak measure-
ment for vancomycin AUC estimation 
in obese adults improves precision 
and lowers bias. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2017; 61(4):e02490-16.
127.
 C
arreno JJ, Lomaestro B, Tietjan J, 
Lodise TP . Pilot study of a Bayesian 
approach to estimate vancomycin 
exposure in obese patients with 
limited pharmacokinetic sampling. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017; 
61(5):e02478-16.
128.
 F
u CF , Huang JD, Wang JT , Lin SW, 
Wu CC. The ratio of pre-dialysis van-
comycin trough serum concentration 
to minimum inhibitory concentra-
tion is associated with treatment 
outcomes in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus  bacteremia. 
PLoS One. 2018; 13(3):e0193585.
129.
 Z
elenitsky SA, Ariano RE, McCrae ML, 
Vercaigne LM. Initial vancomycin 
dosing protocol to achieve therapeutic 
serum concentrations in patients 
undergoing hemodialysis. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2012; 55(4):527-533.
130.
 L
ewis SJ, Mueller BA. Contemporary 
vancomycin dosing in chronic hemo-
dialysis patients does not meet AUC 
targets: development of a new dosing 
model using Monte Carlo simulation. 
Presentation at: Infectious Diseases 
Week; 2016; New Orleans LA.
131.
 S
cott MK, Mueller BA, Clark WR. 
Vancomycin mass transfer character-
istics of high-flux cellulosic dialysers. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1997; 
12(12):2647-2653.
132.
 C
lark WR, Mueller BA, Kraus MA, 
Macias WL. Extracorporeal therapy 
requirements for patients with acute 
renal failure. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1997; 
8(5):804-812.
133.
 M
ueller BA, Smoyer WE. Challenges 
in developing evidence-based drug 
dosing guidelines for adults and 
children receiving renal replacement 
therapy. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2009; 
86(5):479-482.
134.
 V
ancomycin hydrochloride for injec-
tion [package insert]. Lake Forest, IL: 
Hospira, Inc.; March 2017.
135.
 Lanes
e DM, Alfrey PS, Molitoris BA. 
Markedly increased clearance of van-
comycin during hemodialysis using 
polysulfone dialyzers. Kidney Int. 1989; 
35(6):1409-1412.
136.
 Q
uale JM, O’Halloran JJ, 
DeVincenzo N, Barth RH. 
Removal of vancomycin by high-
flux hemodialysis membranes. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1992; 
36(7):1424-1426.
137.
 S
cott MK, Macias WL, Kraus MA, 
Clark WR, Carfagna MA, Mueller BA. 
Effects of dialysis membrane on 
intradialytic vancomycin admin-
istration. Pharmacotherapy. 1997; 
17(2):256-262.
138.
 M
ason NA, Neudeck BL, Welage LS, 
Patel JA, Swartz RD. Comparison of 3 
vancomycin dosage regimens during 
hemodialysis with cellulose triace-
tate dialyzers: post-dialysis versus 
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  27
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
intradialytic administration. Clin 
Nephrol. 2003; 60(2):96-104.
139.
 Ar
iano RE, Fine A, Sitar DS, Rexrode S, 
Zelenitsky SA. Adequacy of a van-
comycin dosing regimen in patients 
receiving high-flux hemodialysis. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 2005; 46(4):681-687.
140.
 L
ucksiri A, Scott MK, Mueller BA, 
Hamburger RJ, Sowinski KM. 
CAHP-210 dialyzer influence on 
intra-dialytic vancomycin removal. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant.  2002; 
17(9):1649-1654.
141.
 N
yman HA, Agarwal A, Senekjian HO, 
Leypoldt JK, Cheung AK. Removal of 
vancomycin administered during dial-
ysis by a high-flux dialyzer. Hemodial 
Int. 2018; 22(3):383-387.
142.
 P
ollard TA, Lampasona V , Akkerman S 
et al. Vancomycin redistribution: 
dosing recommendations following 
high-flux hemodialysis. Kidney Int. 
1994; 45(1):232-237.
143.
 Cr
awford BS, Largen RF , Walton T , 
Doran JJ. Once-weekly vancomycin for 
patients receiving high-flux hemodi-
alysis. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2008; 
65(13):1248-1253.
144.
 E
l Nekidy WS, El-Masri MM, 
Umstead GS, Dehoorne-Smith M. 
Predicting maintenance doses of 
vancomycin for hospitalized patients 
undergoing hemodialysis. Can J Hosp 
Pharm. 2016; 69(5):341-347.
145.
 P
allotta KE, Manley HJ. Vancomycin 
use in patients requiring hemodialysis: 
a literature review. Semin Dial. 2008; 
21(1):63-70.
146.
 P
ai AB, Pai MP . Vancomycin dosing 
in high flux hemodialysis: a limited-
sampling algorithm. Am J Health-Syst 
Pharm. 2004; 61(17):1812-1816.
147.
 M
axson R, Pate J, Starr J. Evaluation of 
weight-based vancomycin dosing for 
hospitalized hemodialysis patients. 
Ren Fail. 2016; 38(10):1677-1682.
148.
 K
ielstein JT , Czock D, Schöpke T et al. 
Pharmacokinetics and total elimina-
tion of meropenem and vancomycin 
in intensive care unit patients under-
going extended daily dialysis. Crit Care 
Med. 2006; 34(1):51-56.
149.
 S
coville BA, Mueller BA. Medication 
dosing in critically ill patients with 
acute kidney injury treated with renal 
replacement therapy. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2013; 61(3):490-500.
150.
 H
arris LE, Reaves AB, Krauss AG, 
Griner J, Hudson JQ. Evaluation of an-
tibiotic prescribing patterns in patients 
receiving sustained low-efficiency di-
alysis: opportunities for pharmacists. 
Int J Pharm Pract. 2013; 21(1):55-61.
151.
 P
asko DA, Churchwell MD, 
Salama NN, Mueller BA. Longitudinal 
hemodiafilter performance in 
modeled continuous renal replace-
ment therapy. Blood Purif. 2011; 
32(2):82-88.
152.
 Fr
azee EN, Kuper PJ, Schramm GE 
et al. Effect of continuous venovenous 
hemofiltration dose on achievement of 
adequate vancomycin trough concen-
trations. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2012; 56(12):6181-6185.
153.
 K
idney Disease: Improving Global 
Outcomes Acute Kidney Injury Work 
Group. KDIGO clinical practice guide-
line for acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 
Suppl. 2012(2):S1-S138.
154.
 C
haijamorn W, Jitsurong A, 
Wiwattanawongsa K, 
Wanakamanee U, Dandecha P . 
Vancomycin clearance during contin-
uous venovenous haemofiltration in 
critically ill patients. Int J Antimicrob 
Agents. 2011; 38(2):152-156.
155.
 C
olin PJ, Allegaert K, Thomson AH 
et al. Vancomycin Pharmacokinetics 
throughout life: results from a pooled 
population analysis and evaluation of 
current dosing recommendations. Clin 
Pharmacokinet. 2019; 58(6):767-780.
156.
 M
cNeil JC, Kok EY, Forbes AR et al. 
Healthcare-associated Staphylococcus 
aureus bacteremia in children: evi-
dence for reverse vancomycin creep 
and impact of vancomycin trough 
values on outcome. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2016; 35(3):263-268.
157.
 M
cNeil JC, Kaplan SL, Vallejo JG. The 
influence of the route of antibiotic 
administration, methicillin suscepti-
bility, vancomycin duration and serum 
trough concentration on outcomes of 
pediatric Staphylococcus aureus bacte-
remic osteoarticular infection. Pediatr 
Infect Dis J. 2017; 36(6):572-577.
158.
 F
iorito TM, Luther MK, Dennehy PH, 
LaPlante KL, Matson KL. 
Nephrotoxicity with vancomycin in the 
pediatric population: a systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Pediatr Infect 
Dis J. 2018; 37(7):654-661.
159.
 H
ahn A, Frenck RW Jr, Allen-Staat M, 
Zou Y, Vinks AA. Evaluation of target 
attainment of vancomycin area under 
the curve in children with methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
bacteremia. Ther Drug Monit. 2015; 
37(5):619-625.
160.
 Y
oo RN, Kim SH, Lee J. Impact of initial 
vancomycin trough concentration on 
clinical and microbiological outcomes 
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus bacteremia in children. J Korean 
Med Sci. 2017; 32(1):22-28.
161.
 Eil
and LS, English TM, Eiland EH 3rd. 
Assessment of vancomycin dosing and 
subsequent serum concentrations in 
pediatric patients. Ann Pharmacother. 
2011; 45(5):582-589.
162.
 Fr
ymoyer A, Hersh AL, Benet LZ, 
Guglielmo BJ. Current recommended 
dosing of vancomycin for children 
with invasive methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus infections is 
inadequate. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2009; 
28(5):398-402.
163.
 Fr
ymoyer A, Guglielmo BJ, Hersh AL. 
Desired vancomycin trough serum 
concentration for treating invasive 
methicillin-resistant staphylococcal 
infections. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2013; 
32(10):1077-1079.
164.
 L
e J, Bradley JS, Murray W et al. 
Improved vancomycin dosing in 
children using area under the curve 
exposure. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2013; 
32(4):e155-e163.
165.
 P
loessl C, White C, Manasco K. 
Correlation of a vancomycin pharma-
cokinetic model and trough serum 
concentrations in pediatric patients. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2015; 34(10):e244
-e247.
166.
 M
adigan T , Sieve RM, Graner KK, 
Banerjee R. The effect of age and 
weight on vancomycin serum 
trough concentrations in pediatric 
patients. Pharmacotherapy. 2013; 
33(12):1264-1272.
167.
 D
emirjian A, Finkelstein Y, Nava-
Ocampo A et al. A randomized con-
trolled trial of a vancomycin loading 
dose in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2013; 32(11):1217-1223.
168.
 A
bdel Hadi O, Al Omar S, Nazer LH, 
Mubarak S, Le J. Vancomycin phar-
macokinetics and predicted dosage 
requirements in pediatric cancer 
patients. J Oncol Pharm Pract. 2016; 
22(3):448-453.
169.
 L
e J, Vaida F , Nguyen E et al. 
Population-based pharmacokinetic 
modeling of vancomycin in children 
with renal insufficiency. J Pharmacol 
Clin Toxicol. 2014; 2(1):1017-1026.
170.
 A
vedissian SN, Bradley E, Zhang D 
et al. Augmented renal clearance using 
population-based pharmacokinetic 
modeling in critically ill pediatric 
patients. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2017; 
18(9):e388-e394.
171.
 Z
hang H, Wang Y, Gao P et al. 
Pharmacokinetic characteristics and 
clinical outcomes of vancomycin in 
young children with various degrees of 
renal function. J Clin Pharmacol. 2016; 
56(6):740-748.
172.
 M
cKamy S, Hernandez E, Jahng M, 
Moriwaki T , Deveikis A, Le J. Incidence 
and risk factors influencing the de-
velopment of vancomycin nephro-
toxicity in children. J Pediatr. 2011; 
158(3):422-426.
173.
 K
noderer CA, Gritzman AL, 
Nichols KR, Wilson AC. Late-occurring 
28  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
vancomycin-associated acute kidney 
injury in children receiving prolonged 
therapy. Ann Pharmacother. 2015; 
49(10):1113-1119.
174.
 S
inclair EA, Yenokyan G, McMunn A, 
Fadrowski JJ, Milstone AM, Lee CK. 
Factors associated with acute kidney 
injury in children receiving vanco-
mycin. Ann Pharmacother. 2014; 
48(12):1555-1562.
175.
 M
atson KL, Shaffer CL, Beck GL, 
Simonsen KA. Assessment of initial 
serum vancomycin trough concentra-
tions and their association with initial 
empirical weight-based vancomycin 
dosing and development of neph-
rotoxicity in children: a multicenter 
retrospective study. Pharmacotherapy. 
2015; 35(3):337-343.
176.
 R
agab AR, Al-Mazroua MK, 
Al-Harony MA. Incidence and 
predisposing factors of vancomycin-
induced nephrotoxicity in children. 
Infect Dis Ther. 2013; 2(1):37-46.
177.
 L
e J, Ngu B, Bradley JS et al. 
Vancomycin monitoring in children 
using Bayesian estimation. Ther Drug 
Monit. 2014; 36(4):510-518.
178.
 S
tockmann C, Olson J, Rashid J 
et al. An evaluation of vancomycin 
area under the curve estimation 
methods for children treated for 
acute pulmonary exacerbations of 
cystic fibrosis due to methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2019; 59(2):198-205.
179.
 K
endrick JG, Carr RR, Ensom MH. 
Pharmacokinetics and drug dosing in 
obese children. J Pediatr Pharmacol 
Ther. 2010; 15(2):94-109.
180.
 M
offett BS, Kim S, Edwards MS. 
Vancomycin dosing in obese pediatric 
patients. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2011; 
50(5):442-446.
181.
 H
eble DE Jr, McPherson C, Nelson MP , 
Hunstad DA. Vancomycin trough 
concentrations in overweight or obese 
pediatric patients. Pharmacotherapy. 
2013; 33(12):1273-1277.
182.
 M
iller M, Miller JL, Hagemann TM, 
Harrison D, Chavez-Bueno S, 
Johnson PN. Vancomycin dosage 
in overweight and obese children. 
Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2011; 
68(21):2062-2068.
183.
 N
assar L, Hadad S, Gefen A et al. 
Prospective evaluation of the dosing 
regimen of vancomycin in children of 
different weight categories. Curr Drug 
Saf. 2012; 7(5):375-381.
184.
 Eil
and LS, Sonawane KB. Vancomycin 
dosing in healthy-weight, overweight, 
and obese pediatric patients. J Pediatr 
Pharmacol Ther. 2014; 19(3):182-188.
185.
 C
amaione L, Elliott K, Mitchell-
Van Steele A, Lomaestro B, Pai MP . 
Vancomycin dosing in children and 
young adults: back to the drawing 
board. Pharmacotherapy. 2013; 
33(12):1278-1287.
186.
 N
atale S, Bradley J, Nguyen WH et al. 
Pediatric obesity: pharmacokinetic 
alterations and effects on antimicro-
bial dosing. Pharmacotherapy. 2017; 
37(3):361-378.
187.
 L
e J, Capparelli EV , Wahid U et al. 
Bayesian estimation of vancomycin 
pharmacokinetics in obese children: 
matched case-control study. Clin Ther. 
2015; 37(6):1340-1351.
188.
 N
guyen WN, Bradley JS, Capparelli EV 
et al. Optimal weight-based vanco-
mycin dosing in obese children using 
Bayesian estimation. Presentation 
at: Interscience Conference 
on Antimicroial Agents and 
Chemotherapy; September 21, 2015; 
San Diego, CA.
189.
 Rho
din MM, Anderson BJ, Peters AM 
et al. Human renal function matu-
ration: a quantitative description 
using weight and postmenstrual age. 
Pediatr Nephrol. 2009; 24(1):67-76.
190.
 M
ehrotra N, Tang L, Phelps SJ, 
Meibohm B. Evaluation of vanco-
mycin dosing regimens in preterm 
and term neonates using Monte Carlo 
simulations. Pharmacotherapy. 2012; 
32(5):408-419.
191.
 M
arqués-Miñana MR, Saadeddin A, 
Peris JE. Population pharmacokinetic 
analysis of vancomycin in neonates. 
A new proposal of initial dosage 
guideline. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2010; 
70(5):713-720.
192.
 Ir
ikura M, Fujiyama A, Saita F et al. 
Evaluation of the vancomycin dosage 
regimen based on serum creatinine 
used in the neonatal intensive care 
unit. Pediatr Int. 2011; 53(6):1038-1044.
193.
 C
apparelli EV , Lane JR, Romanowski GL 
et al. The influences of renal function 
and maturation on vancomycin elimi-
nation in newborns and infants. J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2001; 41(9):927-934.
194.
 Z
hao W, Lopez E, Biran V , 
Durrmeyer X, Fakhoury M, Jacqz-
Aigrain E. Vancomycin continuous 
infusion in neonates: dosing optimisa-
tion and therapeutic drug monitoring. 
Arch Dis Child. 2013; 98(6):449-453.
195.
 Fr
ymoyer A, Hersh AL, El-Komy MH 
et al. Association between vancomycin 
trough concentration and area under 
the concentration-time curve in neo-
nates. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2014; 58(11):6454-6461.
196.
 S
tockmann C, Hersh AL, Roberts JK 
et al. Predictive performance of a van-
comycin population pharmacokinetic 
model in neonates. Infect Dis Ther. 
2015; 4(2):187-198.
197.
 Cies J
J, Moore WS 2nd, Nichols K, 
Knoderer CA, Carella DM, 
Chopra A. Population pharmaco-
kinetics and pharmacodynamic 
target attainment of vancomycin in 
neonates on extracorporeal life sup-
port. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2017; 
18(10):977-985.
198.
 L
eroux S, Jacqz-Aigrain E, Biran V 
et al. Clinical utility and safety of 
a model-based patient-tailored 
dose of vancomycin in neonates. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016; 
60(4):2039-2042.
199.
 G
wee A, Cranswick N, McMullan B 
et al. Continuous versus inter -
mittent vancomycin infusions in 
infants: a randomized controlled 
trial. Pediatrics. 2019; 143(2), 
pii:e20182179.
200.
 L
estner JM, Hill LF , Heath PT , 
Sharland M. Vancomycin toxicity 
in neonates: a review of the evi-
dence. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2016; 
29(3):237-247.
201.
 B
hargava V , Malloy M, Fonseca R. 
The association between vancomycin 
trough concentrations and acute 
kidney injury in the neonatal inten-
sive care unit. BMC Pediatr. 2017; 
17(1):50.
202.
 C
onstance JE, Balch AH, Stockmann C 
et al. A propensity-matched cohort 
study of vancomycin-associated 
nephrotoxicity in neonates. Arch 
Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2016; 
101(3):F236-F243.
203.
 P
hillips CJ, Wisdom AJ, 
McKinnon RA, Woodman RJ, 
Gordon DL. Interventions targeting 
the prescribing and monitoring of 
vancomycin for hospitalized patients: 
a systematic review with meta-
analysis. Infect Drug Resist. 2018; 
11:2081-2094.
204.
 P
hillips CJ, McKinnon RA, 
Woodman RJ, Gordon DL. Sustained 
improvement in vancomycin dosing 
and monitoring post-implementation 
of guidelines: results of a three-year 
follow-up after a multifaceted inter-
vention in an Australian teaching 
hospital. J Infect Chemother. 2018; 
24(2):103-109.
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  29
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
Authors(Year Published)
Population, Design,  
Infection Type(s)
Method to  
Determine AUC24
Method to 
Determine 
MIC
AUC/MIC  
Breakpoint/ Target Outcome(s) Measured Reference
Moise-Broder et al (2004) Adults; retrospective; S. aureus 
lower respiratory infections  
(n = 107)
Dose24h/clearance BMD ≥350BMD Bacterial eradication 10
Kullar et al (2011) Adults; retrospective;  
MRSA bacteremia  
(n = 320)
Dose24h/clearance BMD/Etest ≥421 BMD Composite failure (based on 30-day 
mortality and persistent signs & 
symptoms of infection, >7 days of 
bacteremia)
11
Holmes et al (2013) Adults; retrospective; MRSA bac-
teremia  
(n = 182)
Dose24h/clearance BMD/Etest >373 BMD/271.5Etest 30-day all-cause mortality 13
Jung et al (2014) Adults; retrospective;  
MRSA bacteremia  
(n = 76)
Dose24h/clearance BMD/Etest <430 BMD/ 398.5Etest 30-day all-cause mortality 15
Brown et al (2012) Adults; retrospective;  
MRSA bacteremia (n = 50)
Bayesian Etest ≥211 Attributable mortality 12
Gawronoski et al (2013) Adults; retrospective;  
MRSA bacteremia & osteomyelitis  
(n = 59)
Bayesian Etest >292 Time to bacterial clearance 14
Lodise et al (2014) Adults; retrospective; MRSA bac-
teremia  
(n = 123)
Bayesian BMD/Etest 521 BMD/303Etest Composite failure (based on 30-day 
mortality, >7 days of bacteremia, 
recurrence of bacteremia within 
60 days of discontinuation of therapy)
16
Casapao et al (2015) Adults; retrospective;  
MRSA bacteremia & endocarditis  
(n = 139)
Bayesian BMD >600 Composite failure (based on >7 days of 
bacteremia and/or 30-day  
attributable mortality)
17
Le et al (2015) Pediatric patients; retrospective; all 
pediatric infection types  
(n = 680)
Bayesian NA ≥800 Nephrotoxicity 19
Finch et al (2017) Adults; retrospective, quasi-study 
design; all infection types except 
UTI, SSSI, meningitis; surgical 
prophylaxis  
(n = 1,300)
AUC derived from  
multiple samples
NA <400 Nephrotoxicity 20
eTable 1. Summary of Adult and Pediatric Studies With Outcome Assessment
Continued on next page
30  AM J HEAL TH-SYST PHARM  |  VOLUME XX  |  NUMBER XX  |  XXXX XX, 2020
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020

ASHP REPORT
GUIDELINE ON VANCOMYCIN MONITORING
Authors(Year Published)
Population, Design,  
Infection Type(s)
Method to  
Determine AUC24
Method to 
Determine 
MIC
AUC/MIC  
Breakpoint/ Target Outcome(s) Measured Reference
Zasowski et al (2017) Adults; retrospective; pneumonia or 
bloodstream infection  
(n = 323)
Bayesian NA >700 Nephrotoxicity 21
Neely et al (2018) Adults; prospective; all infection 
types  
(n = 252)
Bayesian NA ≥400 Nephrotoxicity, resolution or improve-
ment in signs & symptoms, relapse, 
and mortality
22
Lodise et al (2019) Adults; multicenter, observational, 
prospective; MRSA bacteremia
Bayesian BMD/Etest No threshold identi-
fied, but only 20% 
of study population 
had AUC/MICBMD 
ratio of <420
Composite failure (based on >7 days of 
bacteremia and/or 30-day mortality)
23
Abbreviations: AUC, area under the curve; BMD, broth microdilution; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; NA, not applicable; SSSI, skin and skin structure infection; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Continued from previous page
eTable 1. Summary of Adult and Pediatric Studies With Outcome Assessment
AM J HEALTH-SYST PHARM | VOLUME XX | NUMBER XX | XXXX XX, 2020  31
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajhp/zxaa036/5810200 by ASHP user on 19 March 2020