  GUIDELINES FOR COMPETENCY BASED POSTGRADUATE
 TRAINING PROGRAMME FOR MD IN COMMUNITY MEDICINE

Preamble


The purpose of PG education is to create specialists who would provide high quality health care and
advance the cause of science through research & training.


Community Medicine is an academic subject, a branch of Medicine which deals with promotion of
health and prevention of diseases, involving people’s participation, utilizing professional management
skills. The Community Medicine specialist, will inculcate a holistic view of health and medical
interventions primarily focused on Community Health/Population Health. Thus, he/she should be
equipped with the knowledge, skills, competencies in primary, secondary & tertiary care, control and
prevention of outbreaks/epidemics, community diagnosis, health needs assessment, epidemiological
assessment, research and planning evidence-based health policies and programmes.


The Guidelines for teaching Community Medicine, therefore, should be designed to create a cadre of
professionals who are competent to meaningfully contribute their expertise in planning,
implementation, co-ordination, monitoring, evaluation of Primary Health Care Programs based on
scientific evidence. The competencies must cover a wide spectrum of skills viz., technical, managerial,
administrative, organizational skills, applied skills in Health Information Management, software
application and soft skills of communication, motivation, decision-making, team building, training in
scientific communication and medical writing.


The purpose of this document is to provide teachers and learners illustrative guidelines to achieve
defined outcomes through learning and assessment. This document was prepared by various subject-
content specialists. The Reconciliation Board of the Academic Committee has attempted to render
uniformity without compromise to purpose and content of the document. Compromise in purity of
syntax has been made in order to preserve the purpose and content. This has necessitated retention of
“domains of learning” under the heading “competencies”.



                         SUBJECT SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES


   1. To create a skilled cadre of medical professionals having expertise in application of principles
       of Public Health, Community Medicine and applied epidemiology, contributing meaningfully in
       formulating National Health Policies & Programmes with a systems approach for overall human
       development.
   2. To standardize the teaching & training approaches at post- graduate level, for Community
       Medicine


                                                                                                     1
   3. Research:     To formulate research questions, do literature search, conduct study with an
      appropriate study design and study tool; conduct data collection and management, data analysis
      and report.


                      SUBJECT SPECIFIC COMPETENCIES


At the end of the course the student should be able to acquire the following competencies under
the three domains, Cognitive, Affective and Psychomotor:

   A. Cognitive domain (The student should be able to:)


   1. Describe conceptual (and applied) understanding of Public Health, Community Medicine,
      clinical and disease-oriented approach, preventive approach & health promotion, disease control
      & promotion.
   2. Have knowledge about communicable and non-communicable diseases, emerging and re-
      emerging diseases, their epidemiology, control and prevention.
   3. Apply the principles of epidemiology, health research and Bio-statistics, application of
      qualitative research methods
   4. Calculate Odds Ratio, Relative Risk, Attributable risk and other relevant health and morbidity
      indicators.
   5. To describe nutritional problems of the country, role of nutrition in health and disease and to
      describe common nutritional disorders
   6. Develop nutrition plan for an individual based on his requirements and with concerns to special
      situations if applicable
   7. Plan comprehensive programme to address issue of malnutrition in a given area for a specific
      group
   8. To describe the concept of Environmental Health and its various determinants.
   9. Identify environmental health issues in a given area/community
   10. Assess impact of adverse environmental conditions on health of human beings
   11. Plan awareness programmes at various levels on environmental issues and mobilize community
      resources and participation to safeguard from local adverse environmental conditions
   12. Should be able to provide technical advice for water purification, chlorination, installing gobar
      gas plant, construction of soakage pits etc.
   13. Be a technical expert to advice on protection measures from adverse environmental exposure
   14. To describe the working of Primary Health Care system, Panchayat Raj system, National Health
      Programmes, urban/rural differences, RCH, Demography and Family Welfare.
   15. Do orientation of the inter-linkage of health sector and non-health sector for promotion of
      Health & control and prevention of diseases.
   16. Have familiarity with administrative procedures and protocols
   17. Have knowledge about role of media and its use in health.

                                                                                                           2
     18. Have knowledge of Health Care Administration, Health Management and Public Health
        Leadership
     19. To describe Health Policy planning, Medical Education technology, Information Technology
        and integration of alternative Health system including AYUSH.
     20. To describe the intricacies of Social & Behavioral sciences and their applications.
     21. To describe Public Health Legislations
     22. To understand and describe International Health & Global Diseases surveillance.
     23. To relate the history of symptoms with specific occupation, diagnostic criteria, preventive
        measures, identification of various hazards in a specific occupational environment and
        legislations.
     24. To keep abreast of recent advances in Public Health & formulate feasible, optimal, sustainable,
        cost effective strategies in response to the advances in public health & development.
     25. To describe the principles of Health Economics and apply it in various public health settings.
     26. To explain and correlate common health problems (medical, social, environmental, economic,
        psychological) of urban slum dwellers, organization of health services in urban slum areas
     27. Develop workable interventions for control and prevention of emerging and re-emerging
        diseases at local, national and global level.
     28. Identify behavior pattern of individual or group of individuals detrimental or adversely affecting
        their health
     29. Define and identify vulnerable, under-privileged high risk communities and their special needs
     30. To create awareness about various public health laws
     31. Evaluate cost effectiveness and cost benefits of a Health Program
     32. Understand and express implications of ‘Poverty Line’, ‘Social Inclusion’, ‘Equity’, ‘taxations’,
        ‘Insurance’ on Health care management.
     33. To categorize hospital waste and be able to guide for proper disposal.
     34. To provide a comprehensive plan for disaster management and mitigation of sufferings.


B.      Affective domain:
1.      Should be able to function as a part of a team, develop an attitude of cooperation with
        colleagues, and interact with the patient and the clinician or other colleagues to provide the best
        possible diagnosis or opinion.
2.      Always adopt ethical principles and maintain proper etiquette in dealings with patients, relatives
        and other health personnel and to respect the rights of the patient including the right to
        information and second opinion.
3.      Develop communication skills to word reports and professional opinion as well as to interact
        with patients, relatives, peers and paramedical staff, and for effective teaching.


     A. C. Psychomotor domain: ((The student should be able to:)
The student should be able to perform independently the following :



                                                                                                           3
      Conduct community surveys for assessment of health & morbidity profile, epidemiological
       determinants, assessment of      health needs, disease surveillance,     evaluation of    health
       programmes and community diagnosis
      Conduct epidemic investigations, spot maps, predict disease trends, preparation of reports,
       planning and implementation of control measures
      Demonstrate clinical skills of preparing case history, examination, provisional diagnosis,
       treatment and clinical case management and interpretation of laboratory findings. Conduct
       common procedures such as incision, drainage, dressings & injections.
      Do data collection, compilation, tabular and graphical presentation, analysis and interpretation,
       applying appropriate statistical tests, using computer-based software application for validation
       of findings
      Conduct epidemiological research studies to establish cause-effect relationships in elaborating
       the epidemiology of diseases and health events
      Develop appropriate IEC Material, assessment of community communication needs, training
       skills, counseling skills, conduct Health Education Programmes in urban and rural settings
      Conduct dietary surveys, assessment of nutritional status, nutritive values of common food
       menus, detection of food adulterants, use of lactometer, recording and interpretation of growth
       and development charts.
      Use and apply various instruments and processes concerned with environmental health and
       biological waste management eg. waste collection, segregation and disposal as per protocols,
       needle-disposers, disinfection procedures. Also use of Dosi-meters, Kata / Globe Thermometer,
       Slings Psychrometer, Gobar Gas Plant, Soakage pit, Solar Energy, functioning of ILRs, Deep
       Freezers, Cold Boxes, Vaccine Carriers.
      identify different types of mosquitoes, detect vector breeding places and orientation of the
       methods of elimination of breeding places and placement of a mosquito-proof water tank.
      Conduct clinical screening of various diseases and organize community health camps involving
       community participation in urban and rural settings. Use of Snellen charts for vision, Ischiara’s
       chart for colour blindness, tourniquet tests for dengue diagnosis in fever, BMI and other
       physical measurements of infants, children and adults etc., copper-T insertions and preparation
       of pap smear.
      Conduct tests for assessment of chlorine demand of water (Horrock’s Apparatus), procedure of
       well-water and urban water-tank chlorination, assessment of chlorination levels, physical
       examination of water, methods domestic water purification, oriented in use of water filters.
      Prepare health project proposals with budgeting based on the project objectives.


Miscellaneous skills: (The student should be able to)
   1. Devise appropriate health education messages for public health awareness using various health
       communications strategies.




                                                                                                      4
          2. Identify family level and community level interventions and facilitate the implementation of the
             same e.g. food hygiene, food storage, cooking demonstrations, community kitchen, kitchen
             garden, empowerment of women for promoting nutritional health etc.
          3. Demonstrate counselling skills for family planning services.
          4. Plan and execute BCC strategy for individuals.
          5. Conduct measurement of occupational exposure to harmful influences.
          6. Diagnose occupational hazards and undertake surveys to identify occupational exposures as and
             when necessary.
          7. Elicit appropriate response at individual and community level to prevent occupational hazards
             including IEC activities at different levels.
          8. Use modern IT applications especially internet & internet-based applications.



                                                     Syllabus
Course contents:
 1.          Conceptual (and applied) understanding of Public Health, Community Medicine, clinical
             disease-oriented approach, Preventive approach & Health promotion, disease control &
             promotion.

Learning objectives:
At the end of this course topic, the student should be able to:-
     i.      Understand and explain the concept & application and give suitable analogies/examples related
             to Public Health/Community Medicine (with differences), Disease-oriented v/s Preventive
             approach, health promotion disease control & prevention.
     ii.     Explain correlation between health and human development with analogies/ examples.
     iii.    Explain concept of Primordial, Primary, Secondary and Tertiary prevention with examples.
     v.      Evolutionary History and mile-stones in Public Health – National and International levels.


2.           Communicable and Non-Communicable diseases, emerging and re-emerging diseases

Learning objectives:
At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
i.           Understand and explain Epidemiology of Communicable/Non-communicable diseases- its
             causes, precipitating factors, social & other non- health causes, mechanisms of transmission,
             signs/systems, management, control & prevention measures, related national Health
             Programmes & national Guidelines, Directives, special projects, if any.
ii.          Explain application of Disease surveillance system in control of Communicable/Non-
             communicable diseases.
iii.         Explain & undertake steps to investigate & control outbreaks, epidemics and take measures to
             prevent the same.
iv.          Evolve prevention & control measures based on local & regional epidemiological funding,
             synchronizing with National guidelines.

                                                                                                             5
3.         Applied Epidemiology, Health research, Bio-statistics


Learning objectives:
At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
i.         Explain the concept & application of Epidemiology of Disease and Health giving suitable
           examples.
ii.        Explain Epidemiological approach, the terms Distribution & Determinants, uses, types of
           Epidemiological studies, interpretation, merits/demerits and limitations, odds ratio, relative risk,
           attributable & population attributable risks, Hybrid designs (with examples), validity of
           Epidemiological Data and application in practice at field level.
iii.       Explain Epidemiological Research methods, Research related protocols, Literature review,
           estimating sample size, data collection/ compilation/Analysis/ Research, interpretation.
iv.        Develop Health interventional programs based on Epidemiological Finding & create evidence
           for Public Health action.
v.         Understand difference between data, information & intelligence, types of data, survey methods,
           formulating questionnaires, interview schedule, data presentation types & analysis.
vi.        Apply computer based software application for data designing, data management & collation
           analysis e.g. SPSS, Epi-info, MS office and other advanced versions.


4.         Nutrition
Learning objectives:
At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
      i.   Identify various nutritional problems in the region, state and country and contributing factors for
           the same, with due emphasis on ecology perspectives.
     ii.   Explain importance of various nutrients (including micronutrients) in health, their sources,
           requirements and problems associated with their deficiencies as well as over consumption.
 iii.      Plan balanced diet and dietary requirements of various age and sex groups.
 iv.       Dietary/nutritional concerns of vulnerable groups – young children, adolescents,
           ANC/PNC/Lactating mothers/senior citizens/individuals with various health problems e.g
           hypertension, diabetes, renal problems etc.
     v.    Classification of food, food additives, food fortification, food enrichment, food toxins and food
           adulteration.
 vi.       Explain Food production, Food hygiene and safety, food storage, food preparation, food
           wastage and feeding practices.
vii.       Assessment of nutritional status of a community by adopting different methodologies.
viii.      Nutritional supplementation, surveillance, education and rehabilitation.
 ix.       National programmes in nutrition and their evaluation
     x.    National nutrition policy.


5.         Environmental health
Learning objectives:
                                                                                                               6
 At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-


   i.      Highlight importance of external environment (air, water, noise, radiation, temperature,
           ventilation, solid waste disposal, insects and vectors, domestic and country yard pests,
           industrial waste disposal etc. and its impact on ecology and human health.
  ii.      Elaborate on health issues related to housing, air, water, noise, radiation pollution i.e. size of
           problems, area and specific groups affected, measurement of pollution levels and health impact
           of the same, corrective measures
 iii.      Elaborate on requirements of water, water chlorination and household purification measures,
           measurement of chlorine demand, Break-point chlorination levels, water quality.
 iv.       Assessment of quality of water and air, control of air pollution
  v.       Explain environmental sanitation and control measures (including appropriate technologies) –
           modern methods of sewage disposal, mechanical ventilation, soakage pits, gobar gas plants,
           smokeless Chula, solar energy, rainwater harvesting, sewage water recycling plants at society
           level etc.
 vi.       Explain global warming and its health impact.
vii.       Elaborate on forest reserves, social forestry and health
viii.      Study vectors of medical importance and integrated control measures against them.
 ix.       Explain dynamics of transmission of vector borne diseases
  x.       Explain pest control measures
 xi.       Explain environmental health issues in urban and rural areas
xii.       Understand functioning of public sector measures to safeguard environmental health e.g water
           purification plant
xiii.      Explain Legislative measures for protection of environmental health


 6.        Primary Health Care System, Panchayat Raj, National Health Programmes including
           RCH, Demography & Family Welfare:

 Learning Objectives

 At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
      i.   Explain the meaning of Primary Health Care with suitable analogies with reference to India, and
           be able to define the systems approach for implementation of Primary Health Care.
   ii.     Enumerate the elements, principles, population coverage norms, staff patterns, day to day
           activities, programme schedule, stakeholders at PHC level.
  iii.     Explain the scope and implications of 3-tier system of Primary Health Care.
   iv.     Understand functioning of Rural Panchayat Raj system of development and its co-relation with
           health.
      v.   Promote community participation in Primary Health Care programme and motivate various
           stakeholders for the same.
   vi.     Understand and comply with medico-legal procedures related to Primary Health Care activities.
  vii.     Integrate, coordinate both health and non-health sectors for implementing various national
           health programmes.
                                                                                                                7
viii.     Deliver the provisions of various health schemes to eligible be beneficiaries such as Janani
          Suraksha Yojana, Rashtriya Swasthya Beema Yojana, Rajiv Gandhi Jeevandayi Arogya Yojana
          etc.
 ix.      Impart training in health programmes for paramedical workers, lab technicians, community
          health volunteer’s, interns and provide health education in the community.
     x.   Implement Public Health Skills for investigations and containment of outbreaks & epidemics.
 xi.      Understand history of evolution of public health, important milestones in the world and in India.
xii.      Enumerate the various health committees established and their major recommendations since
          1947-48 to till date.


7.        Health Care Administration, Health Management and Public Health Leadership


Learning Objectives:
At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
     i.   Explain the conceptual difference between Administration and Management, Power and
          Authority with reference to health care.
  ii.     Explain the role of fundamental principles of constitution, principles of Democracy and its
          correlation with health care administration.
 iii.     Explain the role of Bureaucracy, Technocracy, Political system, Judiciary, Media and people in
          health care administration.
 iv.      Explain and identify the key positions and their role in health administration at State, District,
          Taluka (Tehsil block) and village level.
     v.   Explain the frame work of health care system at State, District, Taluka & village level and
          understand the mechanism of coordination between bureaucrats, technocrats, political, judiciary
          and media at each of these levels.
 vi.      Enumerate functions of a manager, explain concepts of management and leadership styles,
          various management techniques, planning process, monitoring & evaluation skills.
vii.      Should be sensitive to quality issues in health care management and comply with relevant
          quality management techniques.
viii.     Formulate and manage team approach for implementing health programmes.
 ix.      Apply skills of effective human resource management and identify relevant roles,
          responsibilities and duties of functionaries.
     x.   Implement skills of motivation, communication, negotiation and conflict management at PHC
          level.
 xi.      Develop budgetary statements based on evidence of needs assessment and be able to maintain
          account of expenditure as per norms.
xii.      Undertake community health needs survey, conduct training & communication needs
          assessment of paramedical and health workers, identify vulnerable, underprivileged
          communities, implements high risk approach.


8.        Health Policy, Medical Education, Integrating Alternative system of Medicine
                                                                                                          8
 Learning Objectives
 At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
       i.   Understand and elaborate implications of the policy provision with reference to the current
            health scenario in the country.
   ii.      Explain the role of health policy in promotion of Primary Health care, ensuring equity, inter-
            sectoral co-ordination, appropriate technology and community participation.
  iii.      Explain the various provisions for promotion of preventive and curative health services
            including National Health Mission, National Health Programs, Quality Hospital based services,
            Medical Education and AYUSH.
   iv.      Critically appreciate merits and demerits of the Health Policy.
       v.   Explain SWOT analysis of the policy and debate on evidence based recommendations,
            additions, deletions.
   vi.      Debate on suggestions or recommendations for future inclusions.


 9.         Social and behavioral sciences


 Learning objectives:
 At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
       i.   Understand influence of social and behavioral practices on health.
   ii.      Understand principles of behavior change of an individual and community. Clearly understand
            difference between knowledge, attitude and practices..
  iii.      Understand importance of social medicine and health.
   iv.      Importance of behavior change communication (BCC).
       v.   Socio-cultural factors influencing behavior change.
   vi.      Formal and informal organizations in the community.
  vii.      Influence of peer pressure.
viii.       Know the health problems, where BCC interventions are necessary.
   ix.      Understand factors promoting and detrimental to BCC.


 11.        Public Health Legislations
 Learning objectives:
 At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
  i.        Explain public health legislations and need for the same.
 ii.        Know in detail each public health law – when, why, implementation, impact, issues etc.
iii.        Enforcement of various public health laws.
iv.         Judiciary mechanism for ensuring proper implementation of public health laws.
 v.         Scope for integrated approach for implementation of public health laws.


 12.        International Health
 Learning Objectives:
 At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
                                                                                                          9
   i.   Understand the need and scope for international health measures.
  ii.   Enlist and understand functioning of various UN agencies (including WHO) playing key role in
        international health.
 iii.   Enlist and understand functioning of bilateral vs multilateral international donor agencies.
 iv.    Provide advice to international travelers and vaccination requirements,
  v.    Understand International health control measures e.g. quarantine, airport management etc.
 vi.    Understand the management of international ports from health perspectives.


 13.    Occupational Health
Learning Objectives:
At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-
   i.   Understand the concept of occupational health and its importance, Occupational environment
        and work dynamics.
  ii.   Know different types of occupational exposures at various settings.
 iii.   Enlist various occupational hazards and their relative magnitude.
 iv.    Understand measurement of exposure levels to harmful influences during occupation.
  v.    Understand preventive and control measures against various occupational hazards – global,
        national and local level measures.
 vi.    Understand individual and community responses towards preventing exposure to occupational
        hazards.
vii.    Understand and advise occupational safety measures.
viii.   Understand legislative measures to prevent exposures to occupational hazards.
 ix.    Advise compensation provisions to persons exposed to various occupational hazards.
  x.    Understand occupational health problems amongst people in unorganized sector
 xi.    Understand and advise social security and welfare provisions for workers – ESIS, Factory’s
        Act, Role of ILO, Ministry of Labor, DGFASLI.


14.     The recent advances in Public Health & miscellaneous issues
Learning Objectives:
At the end of this course, the student should be able to:-

   i.   identify & enlist events at local, district, national & global levels influencing or adversely
        affecting health /medical issues of the population.
  ii.   Adopt & practise skills related to utilization of modern technology, software, IT application in
        the interest of health promotion & disease prevention.


15.     Health Economics
Learning Objectives:
At the end of this course, the student should be able to: -


   i.   Describe the scope of health economics.

                                                                                                         10
  ii.       Understand health market & its characteristics.
 iii.       Understand & apply economic evaluation techniques.
 iv.        Assess the mechanism of Funding Health Care services, especially health insurance.
  v.        Advise on alocation of resources appropriately in their work area.


                          TEACHING AND LEARNING METHODS

Teaching methodology

The following is a rough guideline to various teaching/learning activities that may be employed:

           Journal Club : Critical appreciation and discussion of research articles in indexed journals
           Seminar
           Lecture/Discussion : Lectures on newer topics by faculty
           Case presentation : Communicable disease case presentation (focus on epidemiology, control,
            prevention) or Family case ( focus on health needs assessment, SWOT analysis of family, social
            determinants and social empowerment, community management, role of primary health care
            and mobilizing resources for empowerment of the family). PG students will present the cases in
            presence faculty and discuss various modalities of management.
           Public Health Management training in Immunization clinics, Disease Surveillance Units,
            General Preventive OPD, hands-on training in management of national health programs at
            urban health centre and rural health centre along with orientation in health administrative
            system.
           The PG student shall be required to participate in the teaching and training programme of
            Undergraduate students and interns.
           The PG student must have attended Mandatory training in Research Methodology during his
            tenure.
           A postgraduate student of a postgraduate degree course in broad specialities/super specialities
            would be required to present one poster presentation, to read one paper at a national/state
            conference and to present one research paper which should be published/accepted for
            publication/sent for publication during the period of his postgraduate studies so as to make him
            eligible to appear at the postgraduate degree examination.
           Special Seminars / Workshops: conducted by External Faculty on cross-cutting subjects directly
            or indirectly concerned with Health. eg. Critical appreciation of National Developmental
            Budget, delivered by prominent Economist.
           Log Book: Postgraduate students shall maintain a log book of the work carried out by them and
            the training programme undergone during the period of training including details of work
            experience during their postings, including programs implemented under supervision and those
            performed independently. The log book shall be checked and assessed periodically by the
            faculty members imparting the training.
           Department should encourage e-learning activities.
           Postings are given below:
                                                                                                           11
                     Recommended schedule for three years training:

                             Orientation Training/Field postings
                          for students of MD Community Medicine

 No.             Field Posting and work                             Duration
       Posting at Sub-centers & PHCs                 Total period of ONE year during the 3
 01    Under & at RHTC and UHTC attached to          year period of PG course. Posting at
       Dept of Community Medicine as per MCI         RHTC should be residential.
       norm
       Posting in the teaching hospital for          Total - One month
       exposure to clinical departments namely       General Medicine-2 wks
 02    Pediatrics, OBGY & General medicine to        Pediatrics -1 wk
       acquire clinical skills for diagnosis and     Ob. & Gy. -1 wk
       management of Communicable and Non-           Time of posting shall be at the
       Communicable Diseases                         discretion of local feasibility
       Work attachment to gain hands- on skills      Total - One month
       based, training in public health department   Place & time of 2 postings of 2 wks
       & orientation in Health Administration and    each shall be at discretion of local
 03    Management of various National Health         feasibility.

       Programmes and aspects of public health
       management at the offices of the
       DHO/DHS/THO/DTO/DMO/CDPO/MOH
       of Local Civic Body or district health
       authorities.
       Short duration posting in various camps,      Total - one month
       melas, public health emergencies,             Minimum of four postings of 1wk
       investigation of epidemics, implementation    duration each shall be done subject to
 04    of NHP, linen dept of hospital, Hospital      local feasibility.
       kitchen, Hospital record section, central
       drug store, Medical Supdt. Office, blood
       bank, casualty dept., CCL, Hospital waste
       management, ART-VCTC, Matron Office
       (HRD), HMIS etc.
 05    Visits to various institutions of Public      Subject to local feasibility
       Health Importance


During the training programme, patient safety is of paramount importance; therefore, skills are
to be learnt initially on the models, later to be performed under supervision followed by
performing independently; for this purpose, provision of skills laboratories in medical colleges is
mandatory.

                                         ASSESSMENT

FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT, ie., during the training may be as follows:

Formative assessment should be continual and should assess medical knowledge, patient care,
procedural & academic skills, interpersonal skills, professionalism, self directed learning and
ability to practice in the system.

Quarterly assessment during the MD training should be based on:

1. Journal based / recent advances learning
                                                                                                  12
2. Patient based /Laboratory or Skill based learning
3. Self directed learning and teaching
4. Departmental and interdepartmental learning activity
5. External and Outreach Activities / CMEs


The student to be assessed periodically as per categories listed in postgraduate student appraisal
form (Annexure I).


SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT, ie., at the end of training

The summative examination would be carried out as per the Rules given in POSTGRADUATE
MEDICAL EDUCATION REGULATIONS, 2000.

The examination shall be in three parts:
1. Thesis
   Thesis shall be submitted at least six months before the Theory and Clinical / Practical examination.
   The thesis shall be examined by a minimum of three examiners; one internal and two external
   examiners, who shall not be the examiners for Theory and Clinical examination. A post graduate
   student shall be allowed to appear for the Theory and Practical/Clinical examination only after the
   acceptance of the Thesis by the examiners.

2. Theory Examination:

The Post Graduate examination shall be in three parts: -

    1. Thesis: It should be submitted to the University by each post graduate student at least 6
        months before the theory and clinical/practical examination. The thesis shall be examined by a
        minimum of three examiners, one internal and two external examiners, appointed by the
        university and who shall not be the examiners for theory and practical. A post graduate student
        shall be allowed to appear for the theory and practical/clinical examination only after the
        acceptance of the thesis by two examiners.


    2. Theory:
       The examinations shall be organised on the basis of ‘Grading’or ‘Marking system’ to evaluate
       and to certify post graduate student 's level of knowledge, skill and competence at the end of the
       training. Obtaining a minimum of 50% marks in ‘Theory’ as well as ‘Practical’ separately shall
       be mandatory for passing examination as a whole. The examination for M.D./ MS shall be held
       at the end of 3rd academic year. An academic term shall mean six month's training period.


       There shall be four theory papers as follows:
       Paper I :      Conceptual (and applied) understanding of Public Health, Community
                      Medicine, Communicable and Non- Communicable diseases, emerging and
                      re-emerging diseases, Applied Epidemiology, Health research, Bio-statistics.


                                                                                                      13
       Paper II:      Nutrition, Environmental Health, Primary Health Care system, Panchayat Raj
                      system, National health Programs, RCH, Demography and Family Welfare,
                      Health Care Administration, Health Management and Public Health
                      Leadership.
       Paper III:     Social & Behavioral sciences- applied aspects, Scientific communications &
                      Medical writing, Research Methodology, Public Health Legislations,
                      International Health & Global Diseases surveillance.
       Paper IV:      Health Policy planning, Medical Education technology, Information
                      Technology, Integration of alternative Health system including AYUSH,
                      Occupational Health, Recent advances in Public Health & Miscellaneous
                      issues, Health Economics.
Practical/Clinical and oral examination:

The practical examination should be conducted over two days, not more than 8 post graduate students
per batch, per day as follows :


1. One long Family case from the community:
   Socio-economic, demographic, cultural and holistic history taking, of the family to understand the
   various risk factors affecting health and quality of life, assessment of social support system,
   assessment of present morbidity and its implications, evolve interventions for medical relief and
   social empowerment and role of family, community and primary health care system in resolving
   family issues. This shall be conducted preferably in the community setting.


2. One long Case (30 minutes), 2 short cases (20 minutes each) – Cases with Communicable
   Diseases

    Students will elaborate on clinico-epidemiological case history to assess the epidemiological
    factors, precipitating factors, probable source of infection and evolve measures for diagnosis,
    treatment, management with reference to the case as well as major public health concerns, i.e.
    Control, prevention of the diagnosed disease and interventions in case of eminent outbreak /
    epidemic situations. Short cases may be assessed without presentation of detailed history,
    beginning with Differential Diagnosis in the given time.


3. Epidemiology and Statistics problem-solving exercises (5):
   (Epidemiological – 3, Statistical – 2)

4. Public Health Spots (5) : including interpretation of analytical reports of water, food,
   environmental assessment and public health micro-biology

5. Viva-voce Examination
   Oral/ Viva-Voce Examination shall be comprehensive enough to test the post graduate student’s
   overall knowledge of the subject.


Recommended reading:
A.   Books (latest edition)



                                                                                                   14
 1.    Public Health and Preventive Medicine (Maxcy-Rosenau-Last Public Health and Preventive
       Medicine) by Robert B. Wallace
 2.    Basic Epidemiology. R Bonita, R Beaglehole, T Kjellstrom. World Health Organization
       Geneva.
 3.    Epidemiology, by Leon Gordis.
 4.    Oxford Textbook of Public Health. Holland W, Detel R, Know G.
 5.    Practical Epidemiology, by D.J.P Barker
 6.    Park’s Textbook of Preventive and Social Medicine, by K.Park
 7.    Principles of Medical Statistics, by A. Bradford Hill
 8.    Interpretation and Uses of Medical Statistics, by Leslie E Daly, Geoffrey J Bourke, James MC
       Gilvray.
 9.    Epidemiology, Principles and Methods, by B. MacMahon, D. Trichopoulos
 10. Hunter's Diseases of Occupations, by Donald Hunter, PAB Raffle, PH Adams, Peter J. Baxter,
       WR Lee.
 11. Epidemiology and Management for Health Care,, by Sathe PV and Doke PP.
 12. Vaccines, by Stanley A. Plotkin.
 13. All reports and documents related to all National Programmes from the Ministry of Health and
       Family Welfare.


       B. Journals
03-05 international Journals and 02 national (all indexed) journals




                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                           Annexure I

                                      Postgraduate Students Appraisal Form

                                  Pre / Para /Clinical Disciplines

Name of the Department/Unit :
Name of the PG Student                    :
Period of Training                        : FROM…………………TO……………
 Sr.           PARTICULARS                Not         Satisfactory     More Than        Remarks
No.                                   Satisfactory                     Satisfactory


                                        1 2 3            4 5 6            7 8 9

 1.    Journal based / recent
       advances learning

 2.    Patient based /Laboratory
       or Skill based learning

 3.    Self directed learning and
       teaching

 4.    Departmental and
       interdepartmental
       learning activity

 5.    External and Outreach
       Activities / CMEs

 6.    Thesis / Research work

 7.    Log Book Maintenance

Publications                                                                      Yes/ No

Remarks*____________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________

*REMARKS: Any significant positive or negative attributes of a postgraduate student to be mentioned. For score less
than 4 in any category, remediation must be suggested. Individual feedback to postgraduate student is strongly
recommended.




SIGNATURE OF ASSESSEE                     SIGNATURE OF CONSULTANT                     SIGNATURE OF HOD




                                                                                                                      16
