    COMPETENCY BASED POSTGRADUATE TRAINING
      PROGRAMME FOR MD IN DERMATOLOGY,
           VENEREOLOGY & LEPROSY

Preamble:


The purpose of PG education is to create specialists who would provide high quality
health care and advance the cause of science through research & training.


A post graduate specialist having undergone the required training should be able to
recognize the health needs of community, should be competent to handle effectively the
medical problems and aware of recent advances pertaining to the discipline. The PG
student should acquire basic skills in teaching medical/para-medical students. The
student should be able to counsel patients and relatives in infectious diseases like
HIV/AIDS, STDs, cutaneous tuberculosis, leprosy and any event of serious illness or
death.


The purpose of this document is to provide teachers and learners illustrative guidelines to
achieve defined outcomes through learning and assessment. This document was prepared
by various subject-content specialists. The Reconciliation Board of the Academic
Committee has attempted to render uniformity without compromise to purpose and
content of the document. Compromise in purity of syntax has been made in order to
preserve the purpose and content. This has necessitated retention of “domains of
learning” under the heading “competencies”.



             SUBJECT SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES

 At the end of 3 years of post graduate training in Dermatology, Venereology &
 Leprosy:


        Student should have knowledge of basic sciences (Anatomy, Physiology,
         Biochemistry, Microbiology, Pathology and Pharmacology) as applied to
         dermatology. The student should acquire in-depth knowledge of his subject
         including recent advances. The student should be fully conversant with the
         bedside procedures (diagnostic and therapeutic) and having knowledge of latest
         diagnostics and therapeutics available.

        Student should have acquired practical and procedural skills related to the subject.

        Critically evaluate, initiate investigation and clinically manage cases in
         Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy with the help of relevant investigations.




                                                                                            1
        Should plan and advise measures for the prevention and rehabilitation of patients
         with various dermatological conditions.

        Able to ensure the implementation of National Health Programmes, particularly in
         sexually transmitted diseases (STD) and leprosy.

        Acquire training skills in research methodology, professionalism, attitude and
         communication skills, as below:


            o Student must know basic concepts of research methodology, plan a
                research project, consult library and online resources, has basic knowledge
                of statistics and can evaluate published studies.
            o Should be able to practice the specialty of dermatology ethically.
            o Recognize the health needs of patients and carry out professional
                obligations in keeping with principles of National Health Policy and
                professional ethics.
        Teaching skills in the subject
            o Student should learn the basic methodology of teaching and develop
                competence in teaching medical/paramedical students.
        Should have acquired Problem Solving skills


                   SUBJECT SPECIFIC COMPETENCIES

By the end of the course, the student should have acquired knowledge (cognitive
domain), professionalism (affective domain) and skills (psychomotor domain) as
given below:

A.       Cognitive domain

At the end of the course, the student should have acquired following theoretical
competencies:

        Describe structure, functions and development of human skin.
        Describe ultrastructural aspects of epidermis, epidermal appendages, dermo-
         epidermal junction, dermis, and sub-cutis.
        Describe basic pathologic patterns and reactions of skin.
        Demonstrate the knowledge of common laboratory stains and procedures used in
         the histopathologic diagnosis of skin diseases and special techniques such as
         immunofluorescence, immunoperoxidase and other related techniques.
        Describe the basics of cutaneous bacteriology, mycology, virology, parasitology
         and host resistance.
        Describe papulosqamous and vesiculobullous disorders.
        Describe disorders of epidermal appendages and related disorders.
        Describe inflammatory and neoplastic disorders of dermis.
        Describe skin lesions in nutritional, metabolic and heritable disorders.



                                                                                         2
      Describe pharmacokinetics and principles of topical and systemic therapy.
      Describe drug reaction, its diagnosis and management.
      Describe cutaneous manifestations of systemic disorders.
      Describe anatomy of male and female genitalia, epidemiological transmission,
       clinical aspects and management of STDs and HIV.
      Describe clinical features, reactions, treatment and rehabilitation in leprosy.
      Describe etiology, pathophysiology, principles of diagnosis and management of
       common problems in dermatology including emergencies in adults and children.
      Describe indications and methods for fluid and electrolyte replacement therapy
       including blood transfusion in dermatological conditions.
      Describe common dermatological malignancies in the country and their
       management including prevention.
      Should be expert in evaluation of ECG, chest X-ray (CXR), biochemical,
       haematology and immunology reports related to dermatology.
      Acquire knowledge of common laboratory stains and procedures used in the
       histopathologic diagnosis of skin diseases and special techniques such as
       immuno-fluorescence, immuno-peroxidase and other related techniques.
      Acquire knowledge of the basics of laser operation and precautions which needs
       to be taken.
      Demonstrate competence in basic concepts of research methodology and
       interpretation of data in medical literature/publications.
      Skilled as a self-directed learner, recognize continuing educational needs; use
       appropriate learning resources and critically analyze relevant published literature
       in order to practice evidence-based dermatology;
      Should also have a broad idea how to approach an uncommon dermatological
       disease.

 B.    Affective Domain
At the end of the course, the student should have acquired the following attitudinal
competencies:


      Demonstrate self-awareness and personal development in routine conduct.
      Behavior and Emotional Stability: Dependable, disciplined, dedicated, stable
       in emergency situations and shows positive approach.
      Motivation and Initiative: Is innovative, enterprising,does not shirk duties or
       leave any work pending and motivates team members.
      Honesty and Integrity: Is truthful, admits mistakes, does not cook up
       information, has ethical conduct and exhibits good moral values.
      Interpersonal Skills and Leadership Quality: Has compassionate attitude
       towards patients and attendants, gets on well with colleagues and paramedical
       staff, is respectful to seniors, has good communication skills.



                                                                                         3
       Should be able to maintain confidentiality with regards to history, physical
        examination and management of patients.
       Identify social, economic, environmental, biological and emotional determinants
        of patients, and institute diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative, preventive and
        promotive measures to provide holistic care to patients at individual and
        community level against skin, venereal disease and leprosy.
       Recognize the emotional and behavioral characteristics of patients and keep these
        fundamental attributes in focus while dealing with them.
       Demonstrate empathy and humane approach towards patients and their families
        and respect their sensibilities.
       Demonstrate communication skills of a high order in explaining management and
        prognosis, providing counseling and giving health education messages to patients,
        families and communities.
     Organize and supervise the desired managerial and leadership skills.
        Should be able to function as a part of a team, develop an attitude of cooperation
         with colleagues, and interact with the patient and the clinician or other
         colleagues to provide the best possible diagnosis or opinion.
        Always adopt ethical principles and maintain proper etiquette in dealings with
         patients, relatives and other health personnel and to respect the rights of the
         patient including the right to information and second opinion.


 C. Psychomotor Domain


A student at the end of training of 3 years of MD programme, must acquire the
following practical skills:
       General medical skills as learnt in MBBS to be maintained:
           o Should be able to provide basic life support (BLS).
           o Should be expert in blood pressure measurement, intravenous access, blood
               sampling, fluid electrolytes therapy, plerual and cerebrospinal; fluid (CSF)
               fluid examination.
           o Should be able to provide basic and advanced life-saving support services
               in emergency situations.
           o Should be able to undertake complete monitoring of the patient and identify
               social, economic, environmental and emotional determinants in a given
               case and take them into account for planning therapeutic measures.
       Recognize conditions that may be outside the area of his specialty/competence
        and refer them to the proper specialist.


Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy, HIV/AIDS Skills

The student should:



                                                                                              4
      Acquire skills in history taking, physical examination, diagnosis and management
       of patients in dermatology, venereology and leprosy.
      Be able to identify, classify and differentiate cutaneous findings in dermatological
       terms in a systematic way.
      Be able to perform systemic examination (chest, cardiac, abdomen, neurological,
       genitals, oral, eye and gynaecological examination) relevant to dermatologic
       condition.
      Be competent to manage dermatologic emergencies like angioedema, toxic
       epidernmal necrolysis (TEN), Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), pemphigus, drug
       reaction and necrotic erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL).
      Be able to plan and deliver comprehensive treatment for diseases using principles
       of rational drug therapy.
      Be able to plan and advice measures for the prevention of infectious disease.
      Be able to plan rehabilitation of patient suffering from chronic illness and
       disability and those with special needs like leprosy.
      Demonstrate skills in documentation of case details and of morbidity/mortality
       data relevant to the assigned situation.


       Laboratory Skills

The student:

           o Should be able to perform common laboratory procedures like potassium
               hydroxide (KOH) mount, Gram stain, Giemsa stain, acid fast bacilli
               (AFB) stain, Woods lamp examination, stains,culture media etc. related to
               the cutaneous diagnosis independently.
           o Should be able to order relevant investigations and interpret them to reach
               to a diagnosis.
           o Should be familiar with other recent investigations.


Dermatopathology - Student should be competent enough to:
      To interpret histopathology of common skin diseases.
      To diagnose common skin diseases by examining slides under microscope.


Surgery in dermatology


At the end of training following skills should be performed independently by the
student:
   1. Should able to give incisions, take stitches and sutures.
   2. Should be trained in taking skin biopsy and nail biopsy.
   3. Should be able to perform chemical peels, manual dermabrasion, skin punch
       grafting and wound dressing independently.



                                                                                         5
   4. Should be able to perform cryosurgery, nail surgery and acne surgery.
   5. Able to perform chemical cauterization, cryotherapy, patch and photopatch test,
       slit smears and tissue smears.


Venereology
   1. Should be competent in the clinical approach to the patient of STDs and
       HIV/AIDS.
   2. Should be able to interpret the histopathological diagnosis including laboratory
       aids related with venereology.
   3. Able to perform dark ground illumination, gram stain, Bubo aspiration and tissue
       smear.
   4. Able to manage the patient according to syndromic approach for treatment of
       STDs.


Leprosy
The student should be:
   1. Able to diagnose and approach the case of leprosy.
   2. Perform AFB smear.
   3. Able to manage cases of lepra reaction.
   4. Identify, judge and decide when to refer the patients at appropriate level for
       surgery or rehabilitation.Should able to manage pediatric cases with skin diseases.


                                          Syllabus
Course contents

Topics related to allied basic sciences

   -   The structure, functions and development of human skin.
   -   Ultrastructural aspects of epidermis, epidermal appendages, dermo-epidermal
       junction, dermis, and sub-cutis.
   -   Immunology, molecular biology and genetics in relation to the skin.
   -   Epidermal cell kinetics and keratinization.
   -   Lipids of epidermis and sebaceous glands.
   -   Percutaneous absorption.
   -   Skin as an organ of protection and thermoregulation.
   -   Biology of eccrine and apocrine sweat glands.
   -   Biology of melanocytes and melanin formation.
   -   Biology of hair follicles, sebaceous glands and nails.
   -   Epidermal proteins.
   -   Dermal connective tissue: collagen, elastin, reticulin, basement membrane and
       ground substance.
   -   Metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, fats and steroids by the skin.
   -   Cutaneous vasculature and vascular reactions.


                                                                                         6
   -   Mechanism of cutaneous wound healing.
   -   Cellular and molecular biology of cutaneous inflammation and arachidonic acid
       metabolism.
   -   Immunologic aspects of epidermis.
   -   Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system.
   -   Immunoglobulins.
   -   Cytokines and chemokines.
   -   Lymphocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils and mast cells.
   -   Complement system.
   -   Hypersensitivity and allergy.
   -   Cutaneous carcinogenesis (chemical, viral and radiation).
   -   Basics of cutaneous bacteriology, mycology, virology, parasitology and host
       resistance.
   -   Common laboratory procedures, stains,culture media etc. related to the cutaneous
       diagnosis.
   -   Basic pathologic patterns and reactions of skin.
   -   Common laboratory stains and procedures used in the histopathologic diagnosis
       of skin diseases and special techniques such as immunofluorescence,
       immunoperoxidase and other related techniques.

Clinical dermatology

   -   Epidemiology of cutaneous disease.
   -   Psychologic aspects of skin disease and psycho-cutaneous disorders.
   -   Pathophysiology and clinical aspects of pruritus.


Papulosquamous diseases

   -   Psoriasis, pityriasis rubra pilaris, pityriasis rosea.
   -   Parapsoriasis, lichen planus, lichen niditus.
   -   Palmo-plantar keratodermas, Darier’s disease, porokeratosis.
   -   Ichthyoses and ichthyosiform dermatoses.
   -   Kyrle’s disease and other perforating disorders.


Vesiculo - bullous disorders

   -   Erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, Toxic epidermal necrolysis.
   -   Bullous pemphigoid, Pemphigus.
   -   Chronic bullous disease of childhood.
   -   Herpes gestationis (pemphigoid gestationis).
   -   Hereditary epidermolysis bullosa.
   -   Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.
   -   Dermatitis herpetiformis.
   -   Familial benign pemphigus.


                                                                                     7
   -   Subcorneal pustular dermatoses.
   -   Pustular eruptions of palms and soles.


Disorders of epidermal appendages and related disorders

   -   Disorders of hair and nails.
   -   Disorders of sebaceous glands.
   -   Rosacea, Perioral dermatitis, acne.
   -   Disorders of eccrine and apocrine sweat glands.
   -   Follicular syndromes with inflammation and atrophy.


Epidermal and appendageal tumours

   -   Precancerous lesions, squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma
   -   Keratoacanthoma, benign epithelial tumours, appendageal tumours
   -   Merkel cell carcinoma, Paget’s disease


Disorders of melanocytes

   -   Disorders of pigmentation, albinism, benign neoplasia and hyperplasias of
       melanocytes, dysplastic melanocytic nevi, cutaneous malignant melanoma.


Inflammatory and neoplastic disorders of the dermis

   -   Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet’s syndrome)
   -   Erythema elevatum diutinum
   -   Cutaneous eosinophilic diseases
   -   Granuloma faciale
   -   Pyoderma grangrenosum
   -   Erythema annulare centrifugum and other figurate erythemas
   -   Granuloma annulare
   -   Malignant atrophic papulosis (Dego’s Disease)
   -   Neoplasms, pseudoneoplasms and hyperplasias of the dermis
   -   Vascular anomalies
   -   Kaposi’s Sarcoma
   -   Anetoderma and other atrophic disorders of the skin
   -   Ainhum and pseudoainhum
   -   Neoplasias and hyperplasias of neural and muscular origin
   -   Elastosis perforans serpiginosa and reactive perforating collagenosis


Lmphomas, pseudolymphomas and related conditions

Disorders of subcutaneous tissue

   -   Panniculitis



                                                                                 8
   -   Lipodystrophy
   -   Neoplasms of the subcutaneous fat


Disorders of the mucocutaneous integument

   -   Biology and disorders of the oral mucosa
   -   Disorders of the anogenitalia of males and females
Cutaneous changes in disorders of altered reactivity

   -   Genetic immunodeficiency diseases
   -   Urticaria and Angioedema
   -   Disorders associated with complement abnormalities
   -   Graft-versus-host Disease
   -   Muco-cutaneous manifestations in immunosuppressed host other than HIV-
       infection
   -   Contact dermatitis
   -   Auto-sensitization dermatitis
   -   Atopic dermatitis (atopic eczema)
   -   Nummular eczematous dermatitis
   -   Seborrhoeic dermatitis
   -   Vesicular palmoplantar eczema


Skin changes due to mechanical and physical factors

   -   Occupational skin disease
   -   Radiobiology of the skin
   -   Skin problems in amputee
   -   Sports dermatology
   -   Skin problems in war field
   -   Decubitus ulcers


Photomedicine, photobiology and photo immunology in relation to skin

   -   Acute and chronic effects of ultraviolet radiation and sun light on the skin
   -   Narrow-band ultraviolet B (NBUVB) therapy, phototherapy, photochemotherapy


Disorders due to drugs and chemical agents

   -   Cutaneous reactions to drugs
   -   Mucocutaneous complications of anti-neoplastic therapy
   -   Cutaneous manifestations of drug abuse


Dermatology and the ages of man

   -   Neonatal dermatological problems
   -   Pediatric and adolescent dermatological problems



                                                                                      9
   -   Ageing of skin
   -   Geriatric dermatological problems


Skin lesions in nutritional metabolic and heritable disorders

   -   Cutaneous changes in nutritional disease
   -   Acrodermatitis enteropathica and other zinc deficiency disorders
   -   Cutaneous changes in errors of amino acid metabolism: Tyrosinemia II,
       phenylketonuria, arginine succinic aciduria, and alkaptonuria
   -   Amyloidosis of the skin
   -   The porphyrias
   -   Xanthomatosis and lipoprotein disorders
   -   Fobry’s Disease; galactosidase - a deficiency (Angiokeratoma corporis diffusum
       universale)
   -   Lipid proteinosis
   -   Cutaneous mineralisation and ossification
   -   Heritable disorders of connective tissue with skin changes
   -   Heritable disease with increased sensitivity to cellular injury
   -   Basal cell Naevus syndrome

Skin manifestations of hematologic disorders

   -   Skin changes in hematological disease
   -   Langerhans cell and other cutaneous histiocytoses
   -   The Mastocytosis syndrome


Skin manifestations of systemic disease

   -   The skin and disorders of the alimentary tract
   -   The hepatobiliary system and the skin
   -   Cutaneous changes in renal disorders, cardiovascular, pulmonary disorders and
       endocrinal disorders
   -   Skin changes and diseases in pregnancy
   -   Skin changes in the flushing disorders and the carcinoid syndrome


Skin manifestations of rheumatologic disease

   -   Lupus Erythematosus
   -   Dermatomyositis
   -   Scleroderma
   -   Systemic Necrotizing Arteritis
   -   Cutaneous Necrotising venulitis
   -   Cryoglobulinemia and Cryofibrinogenemia
   -   Relapsing Polychondritis
   -   Rheumatoid Arthritis, Rheumatic Fever and Gout



                                                                                  10
   -   Sjogren’s syndrome
   -   Raynaud’s phenomenon
   -   Reiter’s syndrome
   -   Multicentric Reticulohisticytosis

Cutaneous manifestations of disease in other organ systems

   -   Sarcoidosis of the skin
   -   Cutaneous manifestations of Internal Malignancy
   -   Acanthosis Nigricans
   -   Scleredema
   -   Papular Mucinosis
   -   Neurocutaneous disease
   -   Tuberous Sclerosis Complex
   -   The Neurofibromatosis
   -   Ataxia Telangiectasia
   -   Behcet’s disease


Bacterial diseases with cutaneous involvement

   -   General considerations of bacterial diseases
   -   Pyodermas: Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus, and others
   -   Staphylococcal Scalded-Skin syndrome
   -   Soft Tissue Infections: Erysipelas, Cellulitis, Septicemia and Gangrenous
       Cellulitis
   -   Gram-Negative Coccal and bacillary infections
   -   Bartonellosis
   -   Miscellaneous bacterial infections with cutaneous manifestations
   -   Tuberculosis and other myopacterial infections
   -   Actinomycosis, Necardiosis, and Actinomycetoma
   -   Lyme Borreliosis
   -   Kawasaki Disease

Fungal diseases with cutaneous involvement

   -   Superficial fungal infection: Dermatophytosis, Tinea Nigra, Piedra
   -   Yeast Infections: Candidiasis, Pitryiasis (Tinea) Versicolor
   -   Deep Fungal Infections

Viral and ricketisial disease

   -   Viral Diseases: general consideration
   -   Rubella (German Measles)
   -   Measles
   -   Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease
   -   Herpangina



                                                                                   11
   -   Erythema Infectiosum and Parvovirus B 19 infection
   -   Herpes simplex
   -   Varicella and Herpes Zoster
   -   Cytomegalovirus Infection
   -   Epstein - Barr Virus Infections
   -   Human Herpes virus 6 & 7 infections and Exanthem subitum
       (Roseola Infantum or Sixth Disease)
   -   Smallpox and Complications of small pox vaccination
   -   Contagious Pustular Dermatitis, Contagious Ecthyma: Orf virus infection
   -   Milluscum Contagiosum
   -   Miller’s Nodules
   -   Warts
   -   Human Retroviral Disease: Human T-Lymphotropic Virusviruses

Therapeutics

Topical therapy

   -   Pharmacokinetics principles intopical applications of drugs.
   -   Principles of topical therapy.
Topical agents

   -   Glucocorticoids, Acne therapies, Analgesics, Anesthetics, Anti-inflammatory,
       Anti hair loss, Anti-microbial, Anti-parasitic, Anti-perspirants, Anti-pruritic, Anti-
       viral, Astringents, Bleaching agents, Keratolytics, Psoriasis therapies, Wart
       therapies, Topical Retinoids, Topical Antibiotics, Topical Anti-fungal Agents,
       Sun-protective Agents, Keratolytic Agents, Topical Cytotoxic Agents, Cosmetics
       and Skin care in practice.

Systemic therapy

   -   Systemic     glucocorticoids,     Sulfones,    Aminoquinolines,        Cytotoxic   and
       Antimetabolic Agents, Oral Retinoids, Antihistamines, Antibiotics, Antiviral
       Drugs, Oral Antifungal Agents, Immunosuppressive and Immunomodulatory
       drugs, Thalidomide, photo-chemotherapy and photo-therpay, electric cautery,
       cryotherapy, electrolysis, tattooing, intra-lesional injections etc.


Surgery in dermatology

   -   Dermatologic Surgery: Introduction and Approach
   -   Skin Resurfacing: Chemical Peels
   -   Skin Resurfacing: Dermabrasion
   -   Skin Resurfacing: Laser
   -   Skin punch grafting
   -   Wound Dressings
   -   Cryosurgery



                                                                                          12
   -   Nail Surgery
Venereology

   -   Clinical approach to the patient of sexually transmitted disease
   -   Anatomy of male and female genitalia
   -   Epidemiological aspects of STDs
   -   Viral STDs including HIV, Herpes, Human Papilloma virus (HPV), Molluscum
       contagiosum, Espirito Santo virus (ESV) etc.
   -   Bacterial STD’s: Syphilis, Gonorrhoea, Chancroid, Donovanosis
   -   Chlamydial infections: Lymphogranuloma venereum, urethritis, cervicits,
       nongonococcal urethritis (NGU), non-specific vaginitis etc.
   -   Fungal: Candidiasis
   -   Protozoal: Trichomoniasis
   -   Ectoparasitic: Scabies, Pediculosis infestations.
   -   Syndromic management of STDs
   -   HIV/AIDS - Epidemiology, transmission, patient load, High risk groups,
       cutaneous manifestations of HIV, treatment of opportunistic infections,
       antiretroviral therapy, management of STDs in HIV positive cases
   -   STDs in reproduction health and Pediatrics
   -   STDs and HIV
   -   Prevention, counselling and education of different STDs including HIV
   -   National Control Programmes of STDs and HIV infection
   -   Medico-legal, social aspects of STDs including psychological and behavioural
       abnormalities in STD patients
Leprosy

   -   Approach to the patient with leprosy
   -   Epidemiological aspects
   -   Structure, biochemistry, microbiology of Mycobacterium leprae
   -   Animal models
   -   Pathogenesis
   -   Classification
   -   Immunology and molecular biological aspects
   -   Histopathology and diagnosis including laboratory aids
   -   Clinical features
   -   Reactions
   -   Systemic involvement (Ocular, bone, mucosa, testes and endocrine etc.)
   -   Pregnancy and leprosy
   -   HIV infection and leprosy


              TEACHING AND LEARNING METHODS




                                                                                13
A post graduate student pursuing the course should work in the institution as a full time
student. No candidate should be permitted to run a clinic/laboratory/nursing home while
studying postgraduate course. Each year should be taken as a unit for the purpose of
calculating attendance. Every student shall attend teaching and learning activities during
each year as prescribed by the department and should not be absent from work without

valid reasons.
Teaching methodology:
A list of teaching and learning activities designed to facilitate students acquire essential
knowledge and skills outlined is given below.

1.   Lectures: Lectures are to be kept to a minimum. They may, however, be employed
     for teaching certain topics. Lectures may be didactic or integrated.
     a) Didactic Lectures: Few topics are suggested as examples:

                 1) Bio-statistics
                 2) Use of library
                 3) Research Methodology
                 4) Medical code of Conduct and Medical Ethics
                 5) National Health and Disease Control Programmes
                 6) Communication Skills
     These topics may preferably be taken up in the first few weeks of the first year.
       b) Integrated Lectures: Some of the topics may be taken up by
           multidisciplinary teams eg. Jaundice, Diabetes mellitus, Thyroid etc.

2.   Journal Club & Subject seminars: Both are recommended to be held once a
     week. All PG students are expected to attend and actively participate in discussion
     and enter relevant details in the Log Book. Further, every post graduate student
     must make a presentation from the allotted journal(s), selected articles at least four
     times a year. The presentations would be evaluated and would carry weightage for
     internal assessment.
3.    Student Symposium: Recommended as an optional multi-disciplinary programme.
     The evaluation may be similar to that described for subject seminar.
4.    Ward Rounds: Ward rounds may be service or teaching rounds.
         a) Service Rounds: Post graduate students and Interns should be responsible
             for everyday care of the patients.       Newly admitted patients should be
             worked up by the PGs and presented to the seniors the following day.
         b) Teaching Rounds: Every unit should have 'grand rounds' for teaching
             purpose. A diary (log book) should be maintained for day to day activities
             by the students.
             Entries of (a) and (b) should be made in the Log book. Log books shall be
             checked and assessed periodically by the faculty members imparting the
             training.




                                                                                         14
5.    Clinical Case Presentations: Minimum of 5 cases to be presented by every post
      graduate student each year. They should be assessed using check lists and entries
      made in the log book
6.    Clinico-Pathological Conference (CPC): Recommended once a month for all
      post graduate students. Presentation is to be done by rotation. If cases are not
      available, it could be supplemented by published CPCs.

7.    Inter-Departmental      Meetings:     Strongly    recommended     particularly   with
      Departments of Pathology and Radio-Diagnosis at least once a week. These
      meetings should be attended by post graduate students and relevant entries must be
      made in the Log Book.


      Pathology: A dozen interesting cases may be chosen and presented by the post
      graduate students and discussed. The staff of Pathology department would then
      show the slides and present final diagnosis. In these sessions, the advances in
      immuno-histochemical techniques can be discussed.

      Radiodiagnosis: Interesting cases and imaging modalities should be discussed.

8.    Teaching Skills: The post graduate students shall be required to participate in the
      teaching and training programme of undergraduate students and interns.

9.    The post graduate students should undertake audit, use information technology tools
      and carry out research, both basic and clinical, with the aim of publishing the work
      and presenting the same at various scientific fora.
10. Continuing Medical Education Programmes (CME): At least two CME
      programmes should be attended by each student during the MD programme.
11.   Conferences: The student should attend courses, conferences and seminars relevant
      to the speciality.
12.   A postgraduate student of a postgraduate degree course in broad specialities/super
      specialities would be required to present one poster presentation, to read one paper
      at a national/state conference and to present one research paper which should be
      published/accepted for publication/sent for publication during the period of his
      postgraduate studies so as to make him eligible to appear at the postgraduate degree
      examination.

13.   Department should encourage e-learning activities.

14. Rotation:

      Clinical Postings

      A major tenure of posting should be in the Department of Dermatology. It should
      include care of in-patients, out-patients, special clinics like STD clinic, leprosy
      clinic, vitiligo clinic and maintenance of case records for both in- and out-patients.




                                                                                         15
      A short posting for 2-4 weeks in the Department of Medicine is to be arranged for
      exposure to Emergency Medicine and Resuscitation.

15. Clinical meetings:

      There should be intra - and inter- departmental meetings for discussing uncommon /
      interesting medical problems. Each student must be asked to present a specified
      number of cases for clinical discussion, perform procedures/tests/operations/present
      seminars/review articles from various journals in inter-unit/interdepartmental
      teaching sessions. These should be entered in a Log Book; log books should be
      checked and assessed periodically by the faculty members imparting the training.

16.   Thesis writing:
      Thesis writing is compulsory. All MD students are required to carry out work on a
      selected research project under the guidance of a recognized post graduate teacher,
      the result of which shall be written up and submitted in the form of a Thesis.


During the training programme, patient safety is of paramount importance,
therefore, skills are to be learnt initially on the models, later to be performed under
supervision followed by performing independently; for this purpose, provision of
surgical skills laboratories in medical colleges is mandatory.


                                     ASSESSMENT

FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT, i.e., during the training may be as follows:

Formative assessment should be continual and should assess medical knowledge,
patient care, procedural & academic skills, interpersonal skills, professionalism, self
directed learning and ability to practice in the system.


Quarterly assessment during the MD training should be based on:
1. Journal based / recent advances learning
2. Patient based /Laboratory or Skill based learning
3. Self directed learning and teaching
4. Departmental and interdepartmental learning activity
5. External and Outreach Activities / CMEs


SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT, i.e., at the end of training

The summative examination would be carried out as per the Rules given in
POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION REGULATIONS, 2000.


 The examination shall be in three parts:
1. Thesis



                                                                                         16
     Thesis shall be submitted at least six months before the Theory and Clinical /
     Practical examination. The thesis shall be examined by a minimum of three
     examiners; one internal and two external examiners, who shall not be the examiners
     for Theory and Clinical examination. A post graduate student shall be allowed to
     appear for the Theory and Practical/Clinical examination only after the acceptance of
     the Thesis by the examiners.


2. Theory Examination:

     There shall be four papers each of three hours duration. Each paper shall consist of
     two long essay questions, three short essay questions and four short notes. These are:


     Paper – I        Basic Science as applied to Dermatology, STDs and Leprosy
     Paper – II       Dermatology
     Paper – III      STD & Leprosy
     Paper – IV       Recent advances in field of Dermatology, Applied Sciences
                      pertaining to skin /VD & internal medicine and skin

3.       Clinical / Practical and viva voce Examination
         Practical examination should be taken to assess competence and skills of
         techniques and procedures and should consist of two long cases, two short cases
         and 10 spots.

         During oral/viva voce examination, student should be evaluated for Interpretation
         of   data,   instruments,   clinical   problems,   radiological   and   biochemical
         investigations, slides, drugs, X-rays etc.


Recommended Reading:
Books (latest edition)

        Sexually Transmitted Diseases - Sharma V K
        IADVL Text book of Dermatology - R G Walia
        IAL Textbook of Leprosy - H Kar
        Bolognia “Textbook of Dermatology”
        Text Book of Dermatology, Wilkinson/Ebling/Rook, 4 Volumes, Oxford
        Text Book of Dermatology, Samuel L. Moschelia M.D. Harry J. Hurllay M.D., 2
         Volumes
        Histopathology of the Skin, Walter - F. Lever- Gundula Schaumburg Lever
        Atlas of Dermatology, 2 Volumes, Bhalani Publishing House, Dadar, Mumbai.
        Diseases of the skin, I Iarry L Arnold Richard 13-Dom William D. James,
         Andrews
        Differential Diagnosis in Dermtology, Satish S. Savant, Radha Atalshah, Deepak
         Gore, Richard Ashan, Barbara Lepdard



                                                                                         17
      Leprosy, Dharmendra, 2 Volumes, Samant and Company, Mumbai.
      Recent Advances in Dermatology, Champion, R.H. Pye, R.J. 8th Volumes.
      Venereal Diseases, Amborse King Claude Nicol Philip Rodin, EL.BS English
       Language Book Society/ Baillere Tindal, East Sussex.
      Sexually Transmitted Diseases, King K Holmes, McGraw-Hill Health profession
      Hand Book of leprosy, Jopling W.H, William Hethgunnah Medical Book Ltd.,
       London.
      Dermatology in General Medicine, Thomas B. Fitzpatrick, McGraw Hill Book
       Company.
      Fundamentals of Pathology of skin, Mysore Venkataram

Journals


Three international and two national journals (all indexed)




                                                                               18
                                                                               Annexure I
                   Postgraduate Students Appraisal Form
                         Clinical Disciplines
Name of the Department/Unit     :
Name of the PG Student                :
Period of Training                    : FROM…………………TO……………
Sr.       PARTICULARS                Not        Satisfactory   More Than      Remarks
No.                              Satisfactory                  Satisfactory
                                   1 2 3          4   5 6        7 8 9
 1.   Journal based / recent
      advances learning
 2.   Patient based
      /Laboratory or Skill
      based learning
 3.   Self directed learning
      and teaching
 4.   Departmental and
      interdepartmental
      learning activity
 5.   External and Outreach
      Activities / CMEs
 6.   Thesis / Research work
 7.   Log Book Maintenance



Publications                                                                     Yes/ No

Remarks*_____________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________
_________________
*REMARKS: Any significant positive or negative attributes of a postgraduate student to be
mentioned. For score less than 4 in any category, remediation must be suggested. Individual
feedback to postgraduate student is strongly recommended.




SIGNATURE OF ASSESSEE         SIGNATURE OF CONSULTANT               SIGNATURE OF HOD




                                                                                        19
