      NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION
           Postgraduate Medical Education Board


      N-P050(20)/16/2024-PGMEB-NMC      Date:20.09.2024




GUIDELINES FOR COMPETENCY-BASED POSTGRADUATE
  TRAINING PROGRAMME FOR M.D. IN EMERGENCY
                        MEDICINE
 GUIDELINES FOR COMPETENCY-BASED POSTGRADUATE
       TRAINING PROGRAMME FOR MD IN EMERGENCY
                                         MEDICINE
Preamble:
Emergency Medicine is a specialty dedicated to diagnosing and treating all emergency medical
disorders and injuries. It encompasses a unique body of knowledge as defined by its scope of
practice of Emergency Medicine includes the initial evaluation, diagnosis, treatment, and
disposition of any patient requiring expeditious medical, surgical, or psychiatric care.


The field of Emergency Medicine encompasses acute aspects of almost all subspecialties and it is
designed to ensure the management of patients in life-threatening emergencies by providing
immediate and definitive care till the patient is taken over by the concerned specialty department.


This curriculum aims to prepare an M.D. in Emergency Medicine to acquire the competencies
pertaining to knowledge, skills, and attitude necessary to function independently and effectively
under any circumstances. This will enable them to deliver high-quality emergency care and
function effectively as educators, researchers, and administrators in Emergency Medicine.


              SUBJECT SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES

   •   Care for physiologically stable patients presenting to acute care across the full range
   of complexity
       At the end of the MD Emergency Medicine Course the student should be able to:
           o Develop expertise in history taking,
           o Develop expertise in Physical examination,
           o Develop expertise in decision making and
           o Develop expertise in emergency management full range of disorders.
   •   Identify sick patients, be able to resuscitate and stabilise and know when it is
   appropriate to stop.
       At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o    Deliver the role of emergency physician as an expert in resuscitation and
       stabilisation of critically ill patients.
       o    Lead or participate as a member of the resuscitation team.
       o    Communicate with the patients and their caregivers with empathy.
       o Support and guide the resuscitation team.
       o Know when not to resuscitate and when to stop resuscitation.
       o Care for the patients at the end of their lives.
•   Care for acutely injured patients across the full range of complexity
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Anticipate and recognize the Life threatening, limb threatening trauma
       presentations. In all age groups
       o Organize and alert the trauma team and ancillary laboratory and blood bank and
       other support systems
       o    Collect and analyze the information from the EMS and prepare the adjuncts and
       be ready to receive the trauma victims.
       o Resuscitate, stabilize and manage the trauma patients as per ATLS guidelines and
       make correct and timely decisions in patient care.
       o Refer to appropriate specialist care as indicated once the patient is stabilized.
       o Decide and transport under supervision and after proper communication.
       o Document the injuries, Notify medico legally if indicated.
       o Be prepared for any disaster/ mass casualties.
•   Care for children of all ages in the ED, at all stages of development and children
with complex needs
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Evaluate the paediatric patients and investigate appropriately.
       o Make decisions, safeguard, resuscitate and care the paediatric patients.
       o Communicate with empathy and clarity to the parents or guardians of the
       paediatric patients.
•   Support the ED team by answering clinical questions and making safe decisions:
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Understand the key steps in diagnostic reasoning, how to make clinical decisions
       and to recognize the factors that have a negative or positive impact on patient care.
       o Acquire the skills to recognize and rectify cognitive errors that can cause harm
       and threaten patient safety.
       o Acquire the knowledge-base and apply the core principles of evidence-based
       medicine to everyday clinical problems.
       o Formulate safe plans of management and decisions on disposal.
       o Effectively communicate with and seek opinion from the seniors in profession,
       subordinates and supporting staff for collective decision making.
•   Deliver key procedural skills
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Perform key emergency skills that are time critical and/or life/limb saving.
       o Organize the equipment and manpower for the procedure concerned.
       o Anticipate and manage the post procedure complications
       o Acquire knowledge, skills and attitude in Basic Life Support (BLS), Advanced
       Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS), Pediatric
       Advanced Life Support (PALS), Point of Care Ultrasound (POCUS) training,
       Neonatal Advance Life Support (NALS), Basic Disaster Life Support (BDLS)
       Advanced Disaster Life Support (ADLS), HAZMAT life support, or Equivalent
       Courses etc, by enrolling standard training courses with periodic updation.
•   Deal with complex and challenging situations in the work place
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Anticipate and manage specific situations or circumstances that can have the
       potential to significantly impact patient care.
       o Manage situations or circumstances that can affect the functioning of the
       Emergency Department like unpredicted events in relation to the interactions with
       patients attending the ED, other agencies attending the ED, challenging professional
       interactions or events that impact on the delivery of Emergency care.
       o Document and timely report to the authorities if there are medico legal
       implications involved.
•   Lead the ED shift
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Lead the Emergency team during the ED shift
       o Organize the duty schedules for the ED
       o Alert the response team and organize the functioning of the rapid response team
       in case of disaster or mass casualties.
       o Ensure proper documentation and maintenance of registers.
       o Communicate effectively with other departments.
•   Support, supervise and educate
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Support and give relevant suggestions to the superiors and management
       authorities.
       o To Support, appreciate and supervise the subordinate staff in patient care and
       collective decision making.
       o Educate and train the learners /juniors / undergraduates /public coming under
       his/her sphere.
•   Participate in research and managing data appropriately
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Participate in and undertake research
       o Acquire fundamental knowledge. skills and attitude to collect, manage and
       analyze data from clinical materials.
       o Develop the attitude towards sharing and disseminating information with
       presentations, posters and publication in indexed journals.
•   Participate in and promote activity to improve the quality and safety of patient care
    At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
       o Participate in activities to improve the quality and safety of patient care by
       monitoring and evaluation of the system.
       o Periodic review and feedback to identify the strength and weakness and to make
       corrective measures.
       o Involve in patient education and public awareness programs.
          o Suggest steps of improvement to the administrators so as to implement patient
          safety measures.
   •   Manage, Administer and Lead
       At the end of the Course the student should be able to:
          o Acquire the basic knowledge in the principles of ED administration
          o Acquire the knowhow on how to establish and develop an Emergency Department
          with the necessary infrastructure and manpower as per accreditation standards.
          o Lead all the activities in the Emergency Department, Academic, research and
          patient care activities.
          o Participate in Conferences, workshops, curriculum improvement programs and
          peer group activities.
          o Keep abreast of the recent advances in the field and incorporate in the patient
          care.


                   SUBJECT SPECIFIC COMPETENCIES

By the end of the M.D. course in Emergency Medicine, the student should acquire the
following competencies:

Cognitive Domain:
   1. Prehospital Care - Comprehend the key features of emergency medical services, the role
       of prehospital equipment and adjuncts, air medical transport, neonatal and pediatric
       transport, and the dynamics of mass gatherings. Reflect upon their implications in the
       broader framework of emergency medicine.
   2. Disaster Preparedness - Familiarize yourself with the conceptual and practical aspects of
       disaster preparedness and response mechanisms. This includes understanding the
       management of natural disasters, comprehending the medical response to bomb, blast,
       and crush injuries, becoming proficient in mass casualty and chemical agent
       management, and gaining knowledge about bioterrorism recognition and response, as
       well as radiation injury management.
   3. Resuscitation - Grasp and internalize the principles and methodologies surrounding
       sudden cardiac death management, adult cardiopulmonary resuscitation, neonatal and
   child resuscitation, resuscitation in pregnancy, ethical concerns in resuscitation, cerebral
   resuscitation, therapeutic hypothermia, acid-base disorders, blood gases, fluid and
   electrolyte balance, cardiac rhythm disturbances, pharmacology of antiarrhythmics and
   vasopressor agents, patient evaluation in shock, fluid and blood resuscitation,
   anaphylaxis, acute allergic reactions, and angioedema management.
4. Resuscitative Procedures - Acquire skills and understanding in non-invasive airway
   management, pediatric airway management, tracheal intubation, mechanical ventilation,
   surgical airway management, neonatal and pediatric intraosseous and central venous
   access, adult venous and intraosseous access, hemodynamic monitoring, cardiac pacing,
   defibrillation, cardioversion, and pericardiocentesis.
5. Analgesia, Anesthesia, and Procedural Sedation - Learn to effectively handle acute pain
   in adults, pain in infants and children, and to administer local and regional anesthesia.
   Develop the ability to perform procedural sedation and analgesia, and manage adults with
   chronic pain
6. Emergency Wound Management - Attain a comprehensive understanding of wound
   evaluation, wound preparation for treatment, and different wound closure techniques.
   Learn to manage injuries to the face, scalp, arm, hand, fingertip, nail, leg, foot, and
   handle soft tissue foreign bodies. Gain knowledge about the management of puncture
   wounds, bites, and post-repair wound care.
7. Cardiovascular Disease - Enhance your knowledge and expertise in the evaluation,
   diagnosis, and management of a broad spectrum of cardiovascular conditions such as
   chest pain, acute coronary syndromes, cardiogenic shock, low probability acute coronary
   syndrome, syncope, congestive heart failure, acute pulmonary edema, and valvular
   emergencies.    Learn     about   the    evaluation,     diagnosis,   and   management   of
   cardiomyopathies, myocarditis, pericardial disease, thromboembolism, systemic and
   pulmonary hypertension, aortic dissection, related aortic syndromes, aneurysms of the
   aorta, major arteries, and occlusive arterial disease.
8. Pulmonary Emergencies - Understand and become proficient in managing respiratory
   distress, hemoptysis, acute bronchitis, upper respiratory tract infections, community-
   acquired pneumonia, aspiration pneumonia, non-infectious pulmonary infiltrates,
   empyema, lung abscess, tuberculosis, spontaneous and iatrogenic pneumothorax, acute
   asthma in adults, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
9. Gastrointestinal Emergencies - Deepen your understanding of the evaluation, diagnosis,
   and management of acute abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, disorders presenting
   primarily with diarrhea, acute and chronic constipation, upper and lower gastrointestinal
   bleeding, esophageal emergencies, gastroesophageal reflux disease, swallowed foreign
   bodies, peptic ulcer disease, gastritis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, hepatic disorders,
   jaundice, hepatic failure, acute appendicitis, diverticulitis, bowel obstruction, volvulus,
   hernias in adults, anorectal disorders, gastrointestinal procedures and devices, and
   complications of general surgical procedures.
10. Renal and Genitourinary Disorders - Become adept at understanding and managing acute
   renal failure, rhabdomyolysis, emergencies in renal failure and dialysis patients, urinary
   tract infections, hematuria, acute urinary retention, male genital problems, urologic stone
   disease, and complications of urologic procedures and devices.
11. Obstetrics and Gynecology - Develop a solid knowledge base for managing vaginal
   bleeding in the nonpregnant patient, abdominal and pelvic pain in the nonpregnant
   female, ectopic pregnancy and emergencies in the first 20 weeks of pregnancy, comorbid
   diseases in pregnancy, normal pregnancy, emergencies after 20 weeks of pregnancy and
   the postpartum period. Learn about the emergency delivery process, vulvovaginitis,
   pelvic inflammatory disease, breast disorders, urogynaecology disorders, and
   complications of gynaecologic procedures.
12. Paediatrics - Cultivate a comprehensive understanding of the assessment procedures for
   children in the emergency department, care strategies for neonatal emergencies and
   common neonatal problems, sudden infant death syndrome, serious bacterial illness
   associated with fever, and various disorders related to the ear, eye, nose, mouth, and
   throat in infants and children. Further, enhance your skills in managing specific
   conditions like stridor, drooling, wheezing, pneumonia, heart diseases, gastrointestinal
   issues, and urinary tract infections in children. Learn about the intricacies of dealing with
   seizures and status epilepticus, headaches, altered mental states, minor head injuries,
   musculoskeletal disorders, rashes, sickle cell disease, oncology, hematology emergencies,
   hypoglycemia, and metabolic emergencies in infants and children.
13. Infectious Diseases - Develop a solid understanding of the evaluation process for sexually
   transmitted diseases, toxic shock syndrome, septic shock, soft tissue infections, and
   disseminated viral infections. Gain proficiency in managing HIV infection and AIDS,
   infective endocarditis, tetanus, rabies, and malaria. Become conversant with the
   assessment procedures for foodborne and waterborne diseases, zoonotic infections,
   medical issues of world travellers, occupational exposures, infection control, and
   standard precautions. Understand the pharmacological aspects of antimicrobials,
   antifungals, and antivirals.
14. Neurology - Attain expertise in the diagnosis and management of a variety of
   neurological conditions, including headache, facial pain, subarachnoid and intracerebral
   hemorrhage, stroke, transient ischemic attack, cervical artery dissection, altered mental
   status, coma, ataxia, gait disturbances, vertigo, dizziness, and seizures. Learn about the
   evaluation of acute peripheral neurologic lesions, chronic neurologic disorders, central
   nervous system and spinal infections, and comprehend the operations of central nervous
   system procedures and devices.
15. Toxicology - Enhance your understanding and skills in the assessment and management
   of patients with poisoning from various substances including a wide range of drugs,
   alcohols, pesticides, metals, industrial toxins, vitamins, herbals, and antimicrobials.
   Deepen your comprehension of the concept of dyshemoglobinemias.
16. Environmental Injuries - Gain knowledge about the diagnosis and management of
   environmental injuries like frostbite, hypothermia, heat emergencies, bites and stings,
   reptile bites, trauma from marine fauna, dysbarism, diving complications, drowning,
   thermal and chemical burns, electrical injuries, lightning injuries, mushroom poisoning,
   poisonous plant exposures, high-altitude medical problems, and carbon monoxide
   exposure.
17. Endocrine Emergencies - Understand and manage cases involving patients with type 1
   and type 2 diabetes mellitus, diabetic ketoacidosis, alcoholic ketoacidosis, and
   hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state. Learn to deal with thyroid disorders including
   hypothyroidism, myxoedema crisis, hyperthyroidism, and thyroid storm, and how to
   diagnose and manage adrenal insufficiency and adrenal crisis.
18. Hematologic and Oncologic Emergencies - Develop a thorough understanding of how to
   recognize and manage anemia, interpret tests of haemostasis, and handle acquired
   bleeding disorders. Acquire skills in managing clotting disorders, hemophilias, von
   Willebrand disease, sickle cell disease, other hereditary haemolytic anemias, and
   acquired haemolytic anaemia. Familiarize yourself with the details of transfusion therapy
   and the management of anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents, and fibrinolytics. Learn to
   manage emergency complications of malignancy
19. Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat, and Oral Surgery - Develop proficiency in managing a wide
   spectrum of emergency conditions concerning the eyes, ears, nose, throat, and oral
   region. Learn about the diverse emergencies linked to the facial structure and jaw,
   epistaxis, nasal fractures, and rhinosinusitis. Enhance your understanding of the various
   oral and dental emergencies, infections and disorders of the neck and upper airway, and
   potential complications associated with airway devices.
20. Skin Disorders - Acquire in-depth knowledge about diagnosing and treating a multitude
   of skin disorders presenting in the emergency department, including serious generalized
   skin disorders. Learn to address disorders of the face and scalp, hands, feet, extremities,
   and disorders of the groin and skinfolds. Handle common skin disorders found on the
   trunk effectively.
21. Trauma - Enhance your capabilities in managing trauma in adults, children, geriatric
   patients, and during pregnancy. Gain expertise in handling various forms of trauma such
   as head, spine and spinal cord, facial, neck, and pulmonary trauma. Learn to evaluate
   cardiac trauma, abdominal trauma, penetrating trauma to the flank and buttocks,
   genitourinary trauma, and penetrating trauma to the extremities.
22. Orthopaedics - Cultivate your skills in the initial evaluation and management of
   orthopedic injuries, including those to the hand, wrist, elbow, shoulder, pelvis, hip, knee,
   and foot. Gain understanding of the diagnosis and management of neck and back pain,
   shoulder pain, hip and knee pain, systemic rheumatic diseases, nontraumatic disorders of
   the hand, acute disorders of the joints and bursae, and soft tissue problems of the foot.
23. Psychosocial Disorders - Attain expertise in understanding and handling behavioral
   disorders. Gain a thorough understanding of emergency assessment procedures,
   diagnostic criteria, psychotropic medications, rapid tranquilization, anorexia nervosa,
   bulimia nervosa, panic disorder, conversion disorder, and the management of substance
   abuse.
24. Abuse and Assault - Develop a sensitive and informed approach to managing issues
   related to child abuse and neglect, female and male sexual assault, intimate partner
   violence, and abuse of the elderly and impaired. Understanding the medicolegal
   aspects of abuse and assault in the state
25. Special Situations - Learn to manage health concerns for special populations such as
   injection drug users, transplant patients, morbidly obese patients, and patients facing
   grief, death, and dying. Gain knowledge of the legal aspects of emergency medicine.
26. Principles of Emergency Imaging - Acquire knowledge about non-invasive myocardial
   imaging, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and emergency
   ultrasonography.
27. Point of Care Ultrasound - Develop expertise in the use of point of care ultrasound in a
   variety of clinical scenarios. Understand its application for intubation and tube placement
   confirmation, guidance for venous access, echocardiography, transoesophageal echo,
   cardiac arrest, heart failure, valvular pathologies, lung and pleural assessment,
   hemodynamic        status,   FAST/E-FAST     examination,    peripheral      nerve   blocks,
   musculoskeletal ultrasound, joint aspiration, DVT screening, paracentesis, obstetric
   conditions, paediatric access, airway ultrasound, ocular ultrasound, and intracranial
   pressure measurement.
28. Medicolegal Aspects of Emergency Medicine Practice in India - Understand and apply
   the best standards of case documentation, consent, signs of established death,
   medicolegal proceedings, brain death criteria, validity of DNR/DNI/DNT orders, and
   various acts related to transplantation of human organs, MTP, PCPNDT, POCSO, Mental
   Health, Clinical Establishments, Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace, Consumer
   Protection, Domestic Violence, Good Samaritan Law, Hospital Protection Act. Learn
   about court procedures, dying declaration, expert witness roles, inquests, subpoenas and
   summons, medicolegal autopsy, wound and injury documentation, associated offenses,
   rape case procedures, and the role of the Clinical Forensic Medicine Unit.
29. Administration - Understand and apply concepts related to credentialing, career
   development, recruitment, budgeting, health care financing, managed care, personnel
       management, public relations, marketing, hospital administration, practice management,
       contracts, work schedules, cost containment, NABH, JCI, NMC, NBE requirements, and
       hospital and Emergency Department administrative organization.




Psychomotor Domain:
Clinical assessment skills:
   1. Elicits a focused clinical history
   2. Perform a thorough physical examination of all the systems
       a. Respiratory system
       b. Cardiovascular system
       c. Neurological system
       d. Abdomen including hernia and rectal examination
       e. Ophthalmologic examination
       f. ENT examination
       g. Obstetric examination
       h. Dermatologic examination


Procedural skills:(Minimum number of procedures that a candidate needs to perform are:)
   1. Airway management and cervical                         f. Pediatric airway management
       spine Control                                               (25)
           a. Basic airway management                        g. Neonatal airway management
               (opening airway by various                          (5)
               methods) (100)                        2. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
           b. Bag mask ventilation (100)                     a. Basic (50)
           c. Advanced airway                                b. Advanced (50)
               management (25)                       3. Electric therapy
           d. Tracheal intubation (100)                      a. Cardioversion/defibrillation
           e. Alternative procedures (non-                         (40)
               surgical and surgical (25)
       b. Temporary cardiac pacing              b. Skin/eye decontamination
          (10)                           10. Paracentesis (25)
4. ECG interpretation (250)              11. Neurological: Lumbar puncture (10)
5. Ventilator management (100)           12. Wound management
6. Basic trauma management and                  a. Wound preparation (50)
   Advanced                                     b. Wound closure techniques
       a. Trauma Life Support (100)                 (50)
       b. Intercostal chest tube (10)           c. Debridement (25)
       c. Needle thoracentesis (10)             d. Dressing techniques (50)
       d. ED thoracotomy (1)                    e. Removal of foreign bodies
       e. Surgical and needle                       (10)
          cricothyroidotomy (5)
       f. Suprapubic catheterization     13. Orthopedic emergency procedures
          (4)                                   a. Splinting/immobilization (50)
       g. Central venous access (25)            b. Spinal immobilization (50)
       h. Suture technique (100)                c. Logrolling (50)
       i. Arterial puncture (100)               d. Helmet removal (10)
       j. Nasal packing (10)                    e. Fasciotomy
       k. Foreign body removal (10)             f. Reduction of dislocations
       l. Foley’s catheterization (50)              (20)
7. Pulmonary procedures                         g. Traction splints (10)
       a. Invasive ventilation                  h. Plaster techniques for various
          principles                                Fractures (25)
       b. Thoracentesis                         i. Joint aspiration (10)
       c. Needle/tube thoracostomy              j. Cervical collar application
8. Cardiovascular procedures                        (50)
       a. Cardiac compression (100)             k. Pelvic stabilization
       b. Intra-osseous access (10)                 techniques (2)
       c. Pericardiocentesis (10)        14. Local and regional anaesthesia:
9. Decontamination procedures               Conscious sedation and analgesia
       a. Gastric lavage (10)               (50)
15. Ear, nose and throat procedures        20. Transportation of patients
       a. Indirect laryngoscopy (10)              a. Intra-hospital (25)
       b. Nasal packing (10)                      b. Inter-hospital (10)
       c. Removal of foreign bodies        21. Communication skills:
             (10)                                 a. Patients and relatives (50)
       d. Troubleshooting                         b. Colleagues and other
             tracheostomy tube problems               personnel (50)
             (5)                           22. Ultrasonography and
16. Maxillo-facial techniques                 echocardiography (both diagnostic
       a. Dental anaesthesia (4)              and therapeutic)
       b. Dental socket suture (4)                a. FAST/E-FAST (50)
                                                  b. Focused ECHO (50)
17. Ocular techniques                             c. Airway ultrasound (25)
       a. Slit lamp (20)                          d. Shock assessment (50)
       b. Foreign body removal (4)                e. Pulmonary ultrasound (50)
       c. Lateral Canthotomy (1)                  f. Abdominal and Renal
       d. IOP measurement (5)                         POCUS (50)
18. Gynaecological and Obstetrics:                g. Soft tissue and skin
       a. Delivery (10)                               ultrasound (25)
       b. Speculum examination (10)               h. Joint and fracture assessment
       c. Perimortem Caesarean                        (25)
             section                              i. Cardiac arrest POCUS/TEE
19. Others                                            (5)
       a. Reducing paraphimosis (2)               j. Procedural guidance (50)
       b. Nasogastric tube insertion              k. Ocular ultrasound (25)
             (100)                         23. Interpretation of laboratory
       c. Incision and drainage of            investigations/plain X-rays/CT/MRI
             abscess (20)                     (100)
       d. Nerve blocks (20)                24. Major incident planning (10)
       e. Detorsion of torsion of testis
             (2)
Affective Domain:
   1. Communication and Interpersonal Skills: This involves empathetic communication
       with patients and their caregivers, effective collaboration with team members, and the
       establishment of effective relationships with other departments and staff members.
   2. Leadership and Teamwork: The ability to lead effectively in an Emergency
       Department (ED) setting, including managing duty schedules, coordinating response
       teams, and handling disaster or mass casualty situations. This also includes
       functioning collaboratively as part of a team.
   3. Informed Decision Making and Professionalism: The capacity to make informed
       decisions based on sound diagnostic reasoning and to act with professional integrity
       and responsibility, including timely and accurate reporting of medico-legal
       implications.
   4. Commitment to Patient Care and Lifelong Learning: The commitment to improve
       the quality and safety of patient care, emphasizing a patient-centered approach, along
       with a dedication to self-improvement, self-directed learning, and staying abreast of
       recent advances in the field.
   5. Ethics in End-of-Life Care: Sensitivity and understanding towards ethical issues in
       end-of-life care, including making informed decisions about resuscitation and
       providing empathetic care for patients at the end of their lives.



                                       SYLLABUS
Cardiovascular Diseases:
1. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
           a. Basic life support (one and two-rescuer CPR)
           b. Advanced life support
              - Recognition of cardiac rhythms during cardiac arrest
              - Use of drugs
              - Defibrillation
              - Pacing
              - Post-cardiac arrest syndrome
              - Ethical issues
           c. Leadership during CPR
           d. Choking victim
           e. Neonatal/pediatric CPR
           f. CPR during pregnancy
2. Chest pain
        a. Stable angina
        b. Acute coronary syndromes (unstable angina, ST-elevation and Non-ST-elevation
            myocardial infarction)
                  - Use of thrombolytics
                  - Use of glycoprotein inhibitors in ED
                  - Angioplasty vs. thrombolytics
        c. Pulmonary embolism
        d. Aortic dissection
3. Congestive heart failure and pulmonary oedema
4. Palpitations
5. Cardiac arrhythmias
        a. Tachycardias
                    - Narrow complex vs. broad complex
                    - Electric cardioversion
                    - Anti-arrhythmic drugs
        b. Bradycardias
6. Hypertensive urgencies and emergencies
7. Temporary and permanent cardiac pacemaker
8. Shock
            a. Haemorrhagic shock
            b. Cardiogenic shock
            c. Neurogenic shock
            d. Septic shock
            e. Anaphylactic shock
            f. Blood/blood products
            g. Cardiovascular drugs
                - Fluids
                - Vasopressors
9. Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism
10. Valvular heart diseases
11. Stuck artificial cardiac valve
12. Infective endocarditis
13. Acute pericarditis and cardiac tamponade
14. Acute myocarditis
15. Acute rheumatic fever
16. Vascular access
17. Hemodynamic monitoring
18. Peripheral vascular disease
19. Aortic emergencies
20. Sudden cardiac death
21. Cardiac transplant patient

Airways management and Anesthesia

1. Principle of airway management including difficult airway management
2. Non-invasive ventilation and mechanical ventilation
3. Rapid sequence intubation
4. Pain management
5. Procedural sedation
6. Regional, local and general anaesthesia
7. Surgical airway

Trauma:

1. Trauma resuscitation
       a. Primary survey
       b. Secondary survey
       c. Advanced trauma life support
       d. Transfer arrangements
2. Wound management:
       a. Lacerations
       b. Abrasions
       c. Contusion
       d. Puncture wounds
       e. Principles of management
       f. Control of local bleeding
       g. Suturing
              - General
              - Specific sites
       h. Local anaesthesia
3. Head and facial trauma
       a. Head injury
       b. Fractures of bones of face
       c. Facial injuries
       d. Dental injuries
       e. Nasal injuries
       f. Ear injuries
       g. Oral cavity injuries
       h. Temporomandibular joint dislocation
4. Spinal trauma
       a. Immobilization
       b. Examination
       c. Cervical
       d. Dorsal
       e. Lumbar
5. Chest trauma
       a. Blunt/penetrating
       b. Tension pneumothorax
       c. Cardiac tamponade
       d. Massive haemothorax
       e. Open chest wound
       f. Ruptured aorta
       g. Flail chest
       h. Contusion lung
       i. Emphysema
6. Abdominal trauma
       a. Blunt/penetrating trauma
       b. E-FAST
       c. Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
       d. Ultrasound and CT
        e. Pelvic trauma
        f. Genitourinary trauma
7. Pelvic fracture
8. Extremity trauma
        a. Skeletal trauma (fractures)
        b. Dislocation
        c. Vascular trauma
        d. Soft tissue trauma (strains and sprains)
        e. Hand trauma
        f. Compartment syndrome
        g. Degloving injuries
        h. Amputation/reimplantation
        i. Fat embolism
9. Trauma in children
10.Trauma during pregnancy
11.Trauma in elderly
12. Blast injuries
13. Mass Casualties and Injury Care

Respiratory emergencies
1. Dyspnoea
2. Respiratory failure and ARDS
3. Haemoptysis
4. Acute severe Asthma / COPD
5. Pneumothorax
6. Foreign body
7. Pneumonia and chest infections
8. Thermal/chemical injury to lungs
9. Sleep apnoea syndrome
10. Lung empyema and lung abscess
11. Tuberculosis

Gastrointestinal and Hepatic emergencies
1. Abdominal pain
       a. Acute abdomen
       b. Acute gastritis
       c. Cholangitis, cholecystitis
       d. Acute pancreatitis
       e. Acute appendicitis
       f. Perforation/peritonitis
       g. Mesenteric ischaemia
       h. Renal pain
       i. Intestinal obstruction
       j. Paralytic ileus
       k. Inflammatory bowel disease
2. Vomiting and diarrhoea/constipation
       a. Evaluation of dehydration
       b. Fluid therapy
3. Acute GI bleed
       a. Upper GI bleed
        b. Lower GI bleed
4. Foreign body ingestion
5. Acute volvulus
6. Haemorrhoids
7. Rectal prolapse
8. Perirectal abscess
9. Hernias
10. Diverticulitis
11.Ascites
12.Acute liver failure
13.Cirrhosis and its complications
14.Liver abscess
15.Jaundice
16. Liver transplant patient
17. Gastrointestinal procedures and devices


CNS emergencies

1. Headache
        a. Approach
        b. Specific disorders (including migraine)
2. Syncope, vertigo and dizziness
3. Seizures
        a. Epileptic seizures
        b. Pseudoseizures
        c. Status Epilepticus
4. Coma and neurological impairment
        a. Metabolic coma
                   - Hypoglycaemia
                   - Ketoacidosis
                   - Hyperosmolar coma
                   - Hepatic encephalopathy
        b. Neurological coma
5. Meningitis and encephalitis
6. Acute stroke
        a. Ischaemic
        b. Haemorrhagic
        c. Transient ischaemic attack
        d. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
7. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
8. Ataxia and gait abnormalities
9. Compressive and non-compressive myelopathies
10 Peripheral neuropathy (including LGB syndrome)
11. Myasthenic gravis and crisis
12. Cranial nerve palsies
13. Complications of central nervous system devices and procedures

Genitourinary emergencies
   1. Nephrolithiasis
   2. Acute renal failure
   3 Acute retention of urine
   4. Sexual assault
   5. Complications of chronic kidney disease
   6. Haematuria
   7. Torsion of testis
   8. Sexually transmitted diseases
   9. Epididymitis/orchitis/prostatitis
   10. Obstructive uropathy
   11. Acute pyelonephritis and perinephric abscess
   12. Phimosis and paraphimosis; priapism
   13. Foreign body insertion
   14. Kidney transplant patient
   15. Complications of urological procedures and devices

Ocular emergencies

1. Red eye
        a. Conjunctivitis
        b. Acute glaucoma
        c. Uveitis
2. Trauma
        a. Foreign body
        b. Corneal abrasión
        c. Hyphema
        d. Blow-out fracture
        e. Chemical burns
3. Visual loss/impairment
4. Orbital cellulitis

ENT and Dental emergencies

1. Upper airway obstruction and stridor
2. Epistaxis
3. Acute tonsillitis/sore throat/acute laryngitis
4. Foreign bodies
5. Acute suppurative otitis media and externa
6. Acute sinusitis
7. Other infections
8. Nasal bone fracture and nasal septal hematoma
9. Orofacial pain
10. Dental fracture
11. Dental subluxation and avulsion
12. Complications of airway devices

Non-traumatic orthopaedic emergencies

1. Orthopaedic and neurovascular examination of extremities
2. Acute osteomyelitis
3. Acute arthritis
4. Acute gout
5. Prosthesis-related emergencies
6. Acute back pain
7. Acute neck pain
8. Acute shoulder pain
9. Hand and foot infections
10. Joint infections and inflammations
11. Muscle and tendon infections and inflammation

Onco-haematological emergencies

1. Normal hemostasis
2. Acute bleeding (including congenital and acquired bleeding disorders)
3. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
4. Clotting disorders
3. Use of antithrombotic and antiplatelet agents
4. Febrile neutropenia
5. Thrombocytopenia
6. Anemia and polycythemia
7. Acute haemolysis (congenital and acquired)
8. Superior vena cava syndrome
9. Tumour lysis syndrome
10.Cord compression
11. Metastatic emergencies
12. Blood/blood products and transfusion
13. Stem cell and bone marrow transplantation

Infections

1. HIV in Emergency department
2. Malaria (complicated and uncomplicated)
3. Leptospirosis
4. Enteric fever
5. Chicken pox and herpes zoster
6. Measles/mumps
7. Dengue and other haemorrhagic fevers
8. Chikungunya
9. Evaluation of fever in Emergency department
10. Acute hepatitis
11. Disseminated tuberculosis
12. Management of needlestick injury
13. Tetanus
14. Rabies
15. Diphtheria/Pertussis
16. Cholera
17. Food poisoning
18. Polio
19. Plague
20. Toxic shock syndrome
21. Gas gangrene and other anaerobic infections
22. Sexually transmitted diseases
23. Influenza
24. Fever
25. Immunization
26. Sepsis
27. Soft tissue infections
28. Sexually transmitted infections


Metabolic and Endocrine emergencies

1. Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes mellitus
2. Diabetic emergencies:
        a. Hypoglycaemia
        b. Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state
        c. Diabetes ketoacidosis and other ketoacidotic syndromes
3. Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities
        a. Normal physiology
        b. Hypovolemia
        c. Hyper/Hyponatremia
        d. Hyper/hypokalemia
        e. Hyper/hypocalcemia
4. Acid-base disturbances
5. Hypopituitarism/Hypoadrenalism
6. Hyperthyroidism and thyrotoxic crisis
7. Hypothyroidism and myxoedema coma

Acute toxicology

1. Initial management
2. Recognition of toxidromes
3. Antidotes
4. Insecticides and pesticides
5. Overdose with various therapeutic drugs
6. Poisoning due to various recreational agents
7. Snake bites, and scorpion and insect stings
8. Plant poisoning
9. Kerosene oil poisoning
10. Ethyl alcohol poisoning and withdrawal
11. Other alcohols (methyl alcohol, ethylene glycol and isopropanol)
12. Methaemoglobinemia
13. Hyperthermias
14. Substance abuse
15. Caustic ingestion
16. Asphyxiants
17. Metal poisoning
18. Industrial toxins
19. Mushroom poisoning
20. CBRN disasters
21. Poison control centers

Gynaecology & Obstetrics emergencies

1. Ectopic pregnancy
2. Lower abdominal pain
3. Abnormal uterine bleeding
4. Abortion
5. Pre-eclampsia/Eclampsia
6. Conduct of delivery
7. Emergency contraception
8. Sexual assault victim
9. Amniotic fluid embolism
10. Comorbid disorders during pregnancy
11. Antepartum and postpartum hemorrhage
12. Premature rupture of membranes
13. Other complications during pregnancy
14. Vulvovaginitis, pelvic inflammatory disease

Pediatric emergencies

1. Advanced pediatric life support
2. Care of newborn
3. Stridor (including croup/epiglottitis)
4. Asthma
5. Fever (neonate, young infant, older infant, child)
6. Sepsis
7. Pneumonia
8. ENT and eye disorders
9. Congenital diseases (including cardiac diseases)
10. Neonatal emergencies
11. Dehydration and fluid therapy
12. Sudden infant death syndrome
13. Drug therapy in newborns, infants and children
14. Orthopedic trauma
15. Head injury in children
16. Intubation and ventilation
17. Vascular access in children
18. Pain management and procedural sedation
19. Acute abdominal pain
20. Genitourinary emergencies
21. Neurologic emergencies
22. Hematologic emergencies
23. Oncologic emergencies
24. Metabolic emergencies (including diabetes mellitus)
25. Skin rashes
26. Child abuse
27. Child with special healthcare needs

Environmental emergencies
1. Burns (thermal and chemical)
2. Smoke inhalation
3. Lightening
4. Electric burns
5. High altitude illnesses
6. Diving emergencies
7. Cold-induced illnesses
8. Heat-induced illnesses
9. Near-drowning
10. Animal and human bites
11. Marine trauma and envenomation

Rheumatological emergencies

1. Acute vasculitis
2. Anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome
3. Rheumatologic disorders involving vital organs
4. Kawasaki’s syndrome

Dermatological emergencies

1. Initial evaluation and management
2. Exfoliative dermatitis
3. Steven Johnson syndrome
4. Toxic epidermal necrolysis
5. Skin infections, inflammation and allergies

Geriatric emergencies

1. Psycho-social assessment
2. Mobility assessment
3. Drug pharmacology
4. Geriatric abuse

Psychiatric emergencies

1. Thought & Mood Disorders
2. Anxiety & somatiform disorders
3. Self-harm
4. Delirium, dementia and psychosis
5. Suicide and homicide
6. Alcohol & substance abuse
7. IV drug abuse
8. Sexual assault & child abuse
9. Domestic violence & elder abuse
10.Violence in the ED

Disaster Medicine
1. Definitions
2. Disaster planning
3. Medical response to terrorist incidents

Miscellaneous

1. Pre-hospital care
2. Forensic aspects
        a. Medico-legal examination
        b. Examination of sexual assault accused
        c. Wound examination
        d. Bullet wounds
        e. Types of injuries (simple, grievous, dangerous)
        f. Signs of death
        g. POCSO Act
3. Palliative care in emergency department
4. Death notification in emergency department
5. Legal issues
6. Biostatistics
7. Imaging techniques:
        a. Plain x-rays
        b. Ultrasound and echocardiography
        c. CT
        d. MRI
        e. Interventional techniques
8. Nuclear medicine in emergencies




                TEACHING AND LEARNING METHODS

Formal teaching sessions in Emergency medicine department
                                             Minimum sessions
Bedside rounds/Handover rounds               - Daily
Seminar                                      - Once in a week
Journal club                                 - Once in two weeks
Evidence based medicine discussion           - Once in two weeks
Simulation session                           - Once in two weeks
Radiology Conference (USG/CT/X-RAY)          - Once in a month
Clinical case discussion                     - Once in a week
Mortality meeting                            - Once a month
Audit                                        - Once a month
Student thesis presentation                   - Once in 6 months


All above may refer to sessions conducted in the Emergency Department and not for each
trainee. In addition, 10 lectures per year covering various ED administration and workflow
would be taken by faculty. In addition, students should attend accredited scientific meetings
(CME, symposia, and conferences) once or twice a year.
PG students shall be required to participate in the teaching and training program of
Undergraduate students, emergency medicine technicians and interns.
A post-graduate student of Emergency Medicine will do at least one of the following to make
him/her eligible to appear in his/her final examination:
a. Poster presentation at a National/Zonal/State conference of his/her speciality;
b. Podium presentation at a National/Zonal/State conference of his/her speciality;
c. Have one research paper published/accepted for publication in journal of his/her speciality
as first author.
Basic structured courses for cardiac life support, trauma life support, airway management,
research methodology, suturing and splinting, to be completed by end of first year and
mechanical ventilation, pediatric life support, neonatal life support, nerve block needs to be
completed by the postgraduate by the end of fifth semester.
List of recommended text books:
    •   Rosen’s Emergency Medicine
    •   Tintinalli's Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide
    •   Principles of Pediatric & Neonatal Emergencies by Piyush Gupta
    •   Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies
    •   Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care by Roberts and Hedges’
        Fliesher and Ludwig's Pediatric Emergency Medicine
    •   Ma & Mateer’s Emergency Ultrasound
    •   Textbook of Critical Care by Mitchell P. Fink, Jean-Louis Vincent, Frederick A.
        Moore
    •   Clinical Emergency Radiology by J. Christian Fox
    •   Geriatric Emergency Medicine by Christian Nickel, Abdelouahab Bellou, Simon
        Conroy Stephens
   •   Current diagnosis and Treatment Emergency Medicine by C. Keith Stone, Roger
       Humphries Symptom to Diagnosis: An Evidence Based Guide by Scott Stern, Adam
       Cifu


List of recommended Journals
   •   Annals of Emergency Medicine
   •   Journal of emergency medicine
   •   American journal of emergency medicine
   •   Emergency Medicine Journal
   •   Journal of Emergencies, Trauma and Shock
   •   Western Journal of emergency medicine
   •   Resuscitation
   •   Academic Emergency Medicine
   •   Shock
   •   Wilderness and environmental medicine
   •   Prehospital Emergency Care


LOG BOOK:
Post-graduate students of Emergency Medicine shall maintain a dynamic e-log book which
needs to be updated on a weekly basis about the work being carried out by them and the
training programme undergone during the period of training.It shall be the duty of the Post-
graduate guide imparting the training to assess and authenticate monthly the
record (e-Log) books.
.Monthly observation Proforma
   •   Residents' medical knowledge, patient care, procedural & academic skills,
       interpersonal skills, professionalism, self-directed learning and ability to practice in
       the system will be assessed continuously on the ED floor.
   •   Attendance (number of authorized leaves and number of absences) and reporting time
       at work will be recorded.
   •   Directly observed procedural skills will be assessed (Performa in Annexure I)
   •   A Shift based work placed based assessment will be done daily (Performa in
       Annexure II)
     •   Workplace based assessment of clinical skills will be assessed (Performa in Annexure
         III)
Total procedures(consolidated)
S.                                           Number     Number                 Faculty signature
     Date       Procedure                                           Comments
No                                           assisted   performed              with date


Academic activities (consolidated –within department/peripheral posting/outside
department/outside institution)
     •   Journal Club Presentation performance
     •   Thesis review Presentation & performance
     •   Seminar Presentation
     •   Presentation in conferences & CME
     •   Publications & Posters
     •   Mortality & Morbidity audit
S.No Date Academic activity                Place         Comments        Faculty signature




Rotation:
Schedule for three years of MD Emergency Medicine postings:

Year                            Rotation                     Duration
                                Emergency Department         8 months
                                Paediatric Emergency         1 month
            First Year          Dermatology                  2 weeks
                                Forensic Medicine            2 weeks
                                Cardiology                   2 weeks
                                Wound care and Procedural 2 weeks
                                sedation (In ED Dressing
                                room/MOT)
                                Orthopedics (in ED)          2 weeks
                                Medicine                     2 weeks
                                Emergency Department         5 months
                                Critical Care                1 month
                                OBG                          1 month
                              Orthopaedics (in ward and     2 weeks
       Second Year            OPD)
                              District residency posting    3 months
                              Surgery (in ward and minor 1 month
                              OT)
                              Ophthalmology                 2 weeks
                              Emergency Department          7 months
                              Radiology (CT, MRI, USG) 2 weeks
        Third Year            Psychiatry                    2 weeks
                              NICU                          2 weeks
                              PICU                          2 weeks
                              Neurology                     2 weeks
                              ENT                           2 weeks
                              Orthopedics (in ED)           2 weeks
                              Paediatric Emergency          1 month
                              Elective                      2 weeks
                                     .ASSESSMENT
The evaluation of the students in the M.D. Emergency Medicine course is continuous and
comprehensive, aimed at assessing their knowledge, skills, and attitudes. It includes:

FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT

Formative assessment should be continual and should assess medical knowledge, patient
care, procedural & academic skills, interpersonal skills, professionalism, self-directed
learning and ability to practice in the system.

   •   Monthly observation proforma’s captured in the Logbook.
   •   End Semester Internal assessment by theory exam


SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT
Post graduate Examination shall be as per the guidelines given in PGMER-23.
The final examination consists of following parts:
   •   Thesis
   •   Theory evaluation
   •   Practical/Clinical and Viva-Voce
1. Thesis/Dissertation
Every post graduate student shall carry out work on an assigned research project under the
guidance of a recognised Post Graduate Teacher, the result of which shall be written up and
submitted in the form of a Thesis. Work for writing the Thesis is aimed at contributing to the
development of a spirit of enquiry, besides exposing the post graduate student to the
techniques of research, critical analysis, acquaintance with the latest advances in medical
science and the manner of identifying and consulting available literature.


2. Theory:
Theory consists of four papers of 3 hours each having 10 short-structured questions with 10
marks each
Paper I: Basic Medical Sciences relevant to Emergency Medicine (Anatomy, Physiology,
Biochemistry, Microbiology, Pathology, Research methodology and Statistics)
Paper II: Emergency medical specialties (Medical emergencies, Radiology and Imaging,
Anaesthesia and resuscitation, Toxicology, Emergencies in Dermatology and psychiatry)
Paper III: Emergency surgical specialties (Surgical emergencies, Trauma, Orthopedics, Eye,
ENT)
Paper IV: Recent Advances in Emergency Medicine, Pre hospital care, Pediatrics,
Obstetrics, Disaster medicine, Forensic, ED administration, medico-legal aspects.


3. Scheme of Clinical / Practical Examination(280 marks + 20 marks for
Thesis/Dissertation)
i) Objective Structured Clinical Examination including X-rays, ABG, CT, MRI and ECGs
(40 marks)


ii) Clinical Cases: This would include semi-long cases and short cases related to various
clinical disciplines (Total 150 marks):


             •   Medical emergencies – One semi-long case
             •   Surgical emergencies – One semi-long case
             •   Trauma – One semi-long case
             •   Pediatrics – One semi-long case
             •   Obst./Gynae – One short case
           •   ENT – One short case
           •   Ophthalmology – One short case
           •   Dermatology – One short case


iii) Demonstration of skills (90 marks):
           •   Airway stabilization
           •   Cardiac Life support skills
           •   Communication
           •   Suturing and fracture splinting
           •   Pediatric life support skills
           •   Point of care ultrasound skills
           •   Trauma Life support skills


iv) Thesis/Dissertation (20 marks)


4. Scheme of Viva-Voce
iv) Viva Voce (100 marks):
           •   Instruments and Drugs
           •   Clinical Problems
           •   Research, Publication & Conference Presentation
           •   Pedagogy
                                                 *****
                                              Annexure I
                            Emergency Medicine Workplace Based Observation
                                 Direct Observation of Procedural Skills
    Name of student:
    Semester of training:
    Month of posting:
    Modality Posted:
    Leaves taken:       authorised       unauthorised                Reporting time:

                                      Score 0   Score 1        Score 2           Score 3            Score 4         Score 5

                                      Trainee   Trainee        Trainee           Trainee            Trainee         Trainee
                                      did not   performed;     performed;        performed          performed       performed
                                      perform   senior         senior            independently;     independently   independently
                                                clinician      clinician input   senior clinician   ; senior        at Senior
                                                input          required for      observed and       clinician       resident level
                                                required for   minority of       advised for        required to
                                                majority of    shift             trouble shooting   check
                                                shift
1     Technical Skill
      Performing the Procedure
      Knowledge, technique,
      efficiency, safety
2     Indications and
      Contraindications
      Specific to patient and
      procedure
3     Informed Consent
      Risks, benefits, carers
4     Preparation and planning
      Setting, equipment (including
      monitoring), staff, patient
      positioning, medications
5     Situational Awareness
      Procedure, patient, and
      surrounding environment
6     Prevention and Management
      of Complications
      During and after procedure
7     Post Procedure Management
      Follow up investigations,
      clinical care and
      documentation
8     Discharge Advice to
      Patient/Carers
      Total (8*5=40)
      Logbook (10)
      Total 50 Marks
                                                                                             Signature of faculty


    Resident’s percept of exercise:
    Overall faculty assessment: Area for development and agreed learning goals for next assessment:
                                             Annexure II
                            Emergency Medicine Workplace Based Observation
                                       Shift Based Assessment
    Name of student:
    Semester of training:
    Month of posting:
    Modality Posted:
    Leaves taken:      authorised        unauthorised                  Reporting time:
                                 Score 0   Score 1           Score 2            Score 3              Score 4            Score 5

                                 Trainee   Trainee           Trainee              Trainee            Trainee            Trainee
                                 did not   performed;        performed;           performed          performed          performed
                                 perform   senior            senior clinician     independently;     independently;     independently
                                           clinician input   input required for   senior clinician   senior clinician   at Senior
                                           required for      minority of shift    observed and       required to        resident level
                                           majority of                            advised for        check
                                           shift                                  trouble shooting
1     Medical Expertise
      Assessment and
      management
      Receive and direct
      patient transfers
2     Prioritisation and
      Decision Making
      Clinical reasoning,
      situational awareness
3     Communication
      Verbal, non-verbal and
      written
4     Leadership and
      Management
      Situational awareness
      across area/ department
      Lead ED Staff
      Resourcing
      Patient flow
5     Scholarship and
      Teaching
      Teaching best practice
      clinical care
6     Health Advocacy
      Advocacy, screening,
      intervention and health
      promotion
7     Professionalism
      Ethical, caring and
      honest
      Total (7*5=35)
      Logbook (15)
      Total 50 Marks
                                                                                                Signature of faculty


    Resident’s percept of exercise:
    Overall faculty assessment: Area for development and agreed learning goals for next assessment:
                                             Annexure III
                            Emergency Medicine Workplace Based Observation
                                            Clinical Skills
    Name of student:
    Semester of training:
    Month of posting:
    Modality Posted:
    Leaves taken:       authorised/unauthorised               Reporting time:

                                      Score 0   Score 1       Score 2           Score 3              Score 4            Score 5

                                      Trainee   Trainee       Trainee           Trainee              Trainee            Trainee
                                      did not   performed;    performed;        performed            performed          performed
                                      perform   senior        senior            independently;       independently;     independently
                                                clinician     clinician input   senior clinician     senior clinician   at Senior
                                                input         required for      observed and         required to        resident level
                                                required      minority of       advised for          check
                                                for           shift             trouble shooting
                                                majority of
                                                shift
1     History Taking
      From patient and/or
      collateral sources
2     Physical Examination
      Presence or absence of
      signs, structured
      examination
3     Clinical Synthesis
      Appropriate, prioritised
      differential diagnosis,
      investigation approach
      and/or management plan
4     Shared Decision Making
      with Patient/Care
5     Communication
      Clear, collaborative,
      culturally safe
6     Professionalism
      Competent, caring and
      hones
7     Organisation and Efficiency
      Organisation and
      prioritisation of assessment
      or tasks. Performs
      assessment or tasks in a
      timely manner
      Total (7*5=35)
      Logbook (5)
      Total 40 Marks
                                                                                          Signature of faculty


    Resident’s percept of exercise:
    Overall faculty assessment: Area for development and agreed learning goals for next assessment :
