      GUIDELINES FOR COMPETENCY BASED
 POSTGRADUATE TRAINING PROGRAMME FOR MS IN
        OBSTETRICS AND GYNAECOLOGY

Preamble:
The purpose of PG education is to create specialists who would provide high quality
health care and advance the cause of science through research & training.


The purpose of MS Obstetrics and Gynaecology is to standardize Obstetrics &
Gynaecology teaching at Post Graduate level throughout the country so that it will benefit
in achieving uniformity in undergraduate teaching as well and resultantly creating
competent Obstetrician and Gynaecologist with appropriate expertise.


The purpose of this document is to provide teachers and learners illustrative guidelines to
achieve defined outcomes through learning and assessment. This document was prepared
by various subject-content specialists. The Reconciliation Board of Academic Committee
has attempted to render uniformity without compromise to purpose and content of the
document. Compromise in purity of syntax has been made in order to preserve the
purpose and content. This has necessitated retention of “domains of learning” under the
heading “competencies”.


          SUBJECT SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES

Programme Objectives

The goal of the MS course in Obstetrics and Gynaecology is to produce a competent
Obstetrician and Gynaecologist who can:


a.   Provide quality care to the community in the diagnosis and management of
     Antenatal, Intra-natal and Post-natal period of normal and abnormal pregnancy and
     labor.
b.   provide effective and adequate care to a pregnant woman with complicated
     pregnancy.
c.   provide effective and adequate care to a normal and high risk neonate.
d.   perform obstetrical ultrasound in normal and abnormal pregnancy including
     Doppler.
e.   manage effectively all obstetrical and gynecological emergencies and if necessary
     make appropriate referrals.
f.   provide quality care to the community in the diagnosis and management of
     gynaecological problems including screening, and management of all gynecological
     cancers including during pregnancy.




                                                                                         1
g.   conduct a comprehensive evaluation of infertile couple and have a broad based
     knowledge of assisted reproductive techniques including – ovulation induction, in
     vitro fertilization and intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection, gamete donation,
     surrogacy and the legal and ethical implications of these procedures.
h.   provide counseling and delivery of fertility regulation methods including reversible
     and irreversible contraception, emergency contraception etc.
i.   provide quality care to women having spontaneous abortion or requesting Medical
     Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) and manage their related complications.


               SUBJECT SPECIFIC COMPETENCIES


A. Cognitive Domain
At the end of the MS Course in Obstetrics and Gynaecology, the student should
have acquired knowledge in the following:


         recognizes the health needs of women and adolescents and carries out
          professional obligations in keeping with principles of National Health Policy
          and professional ethics
         has acquired the competencies pertaining to Obstetrics and Gynaecology that
          are required to be practiced in the community and at all levels of health
          system
         on genetics as applicable to Obstetrics.
         on benign and malignant gynecological disorders.
         on Gynecological Endocrinology and infertility.
         on interpretation of various laboratory investigations and other diagnostic
          modalities in Obstetrics & Gynecology.
         on essentials of Pediatric and adolescent Gynecology.
         on care of postmenopausal women and geriatric Gynecology.
         on elementary knowledge of female breast & its diseases.
         on vital statistics in Obstetrics & Gynecology.
         Anesthesiology related to Obstetrics & Gynecology.
         Reproductive and Child Health, family welfare & reproductive tract
          infections.
         STD and AIDS & Government of India perspective on women’s health related
          issues.
         Medico-legal aspects in Obstetrics & Gynecology.
         Asepsis, sterilization and disposal of medical waste.
         be able to effectively communicate with the family and the community
         is aware of the contemporary advances and developments in medical sciences
          as related to Obstetrics and Gynaecology.



                                                                                       2
    maintain medical records properly and know the medico-legal aspects in
     respect of Obstetrics & Gynecology
    Understands the difference between audit and research and how to plan a
     research project and demonstrate the skills to critically appraise scientific data
     and literature
    has acquired skills in educating medical and paramedical professionals


Ethical and Legal Issues:


 The post graduate student should understand the principles and legal issues
 surrounding informed consent with particular awareness of the implication for the
 unborn child, postmortem examinations consent to surgical procedures including
 tubal ligation/vasectomy, parental consent and medical certification, research and
 teaching and properly maintain medical records.


Risk Management:
 The post graduate student should demonstrate a working knowledge of the
 principles of risk management and their relationship to clinical governance and
 complaints procedures.


Confidentiality:
 The post graduate student should:
    be aware of the relevant strategies to ensure confidentiality and when it might
     be broken.
    understand the principles of adult teaching and should be able to teach
     common practical procedures in Obstetrics and Gynaecology and involved in
     educational programme in Obstetrics and Gynaecology for medical and
     paramedical staff.
    be abreast with all recent advances in Obstetrics and Gynaecology and
     practice evidence based medicine.


Use of information technology, audits and standards:
 The post graduate student should:
    acquire a full understating of all common usage of computing systems
     including the principles of data collection, storage, retrieval, analysis and
     presentation.
    understand quality improvement and management and how to perform,
     interpret and use of clinical audit cycles and the production and application of
     clinical standards, guidelines and protocols.




                                                                                     3
         understand National Health Programmes related to Obstetrics and
          Gynaecology and should be aware of all the Acts and Laws related to
          specialty.


   Health of Adolescent Girls and Post-Menopausal Women
   The student should:
         Recognize the importance of good health of adolescent and postmenopausal
          women.
         Identification and management of health problems of post-menopausal
          women.
         Understanding and planning and intervention program of social, educational
          and health needs of adolescent girls and menopausal women.
         Education regarding rights and confidentiality of women’s health, specifically
          related to reproductive function, sexuality, contraception and safe abortion.
         Geriatric problems.


   Reproductive Tract and ‘HIV’ Infection


         Epidemiology of RTI and HIV infection in Indian women of reproductive age
          group.
         Cause, effect and management of these infections.
         HIV infections in pregnancy, its effects and management.
         Relationship of RTI and HIV with gynaecological disorders.
         Planning and implementation of preventive strategies.


Medico-legal Aspects
         Knowledge and correct application of various Acts and Laws while practicing
          Obstetrics and Gynaecology, particularly MTP Act and sterilization,
          Preconception and P.N.D.T. Act.
         Knowledge of importance of proper recording of facts about history,
          examination findings, investigation reports and treatment administered in all
          patients.
         Knowledge of steps recommended for examination and management of rape
          cases.
         Knowledge of steps taken in the event of death of a patient.


B. Affective domain
      1. Should be able to function as a part of a team, develop an attitude of
          cooperation with colleagues, and interact with the patient and the clinician or
          other colleagues to provide the best possible diagnosis or opinion.




                                                                                          4
          2. Always adopt ethical principles and maintain proper etiquette in dealings with
              patients, relatives and other health personnel and to respect the rights of the
              patient including the right to information and second opinion.
          3. Develop communication skills to word reports and professional opinion as
              well as to interact with patients, relatives, peers and paramedical staff, and for
              effective teaching.

C. Psychomotor domain

At the end of the course, the student should acquire following clinical & operative
skills and be able to:

Operative Skills in Obstetrics and Gynaecology


     -    Adequate proficiency in common minor and major operations, post-operative
          management and management of their complications.
     -    Operative procedures which must be done by P G students during training period:
          (in graded manner - assisting, operating with senior person assisting, operating
          under supervision)


(Operations MUST BE DONE/OBSERVED during PG training programme and log
book maintained)


1. Obstetrics: Venesection, culdocentesis
                   Conduct normal deliveries
                   Episiotomy and its repair


        Application of forceps and ventouse (10).
        Carry out caesarian section delivery (10 must be done)
        Manual removal of placenta
        Management of genital tract obstetrical injuries.
        Post partum sterilization/Minilap tubal ligation (20 must be done)
        Medical termination of pregnancy - various methods (20 must be done)


2. Gynaecology: Endometrial / cervical biopsy.
                     Dilatation and curettage
                     Coldocentesis, Colpotomy
        Opening and closing of abdomen (10 must be done)
        Operations for pelvic organ prolapse
        Ovarian cyst operation
        Operation for ectopic pregnancy
        Vaginal and abdominal hysterectomy



                                                                                              5
Operations must be OBSERVED and/or ASSISTED when possible:


        Internal podalic version
        Caesarea Hysterectomy
        Internal iliac artery ligation
        Destructive obstetrical operations
        Tubal microsurgery
        Radical operations for gynaec malignancies
        Repair of genital fistulae
        Operations for incontinence
        Myomectomy, Laparoscopic and hysteroscopic surgery


Diagnostic Procedures


     -     Interpretation of x-rays - Twins, common fetal malformations / mal-presentations,
           abnormal pelvis (pelvimetry), Hysterosalpingography
     -     Sonographic pictures at various stages of pregnancy - normal and abnormal
           pregnancies, Fetal biophysical profile, common gynaecological pathologies.
     -     Amniocentesis
     -     Fetal surveillance methods - Electronic fetal monitoring and its interpretation
     -     Post-coital test
     -     Vaginal Pap Smear
     -     Colposcopy
     -     Endoscopy - Laparo and Hystero-scopy.


     Health of Adolescent Girls and Post-Menopausal Women


     -     Provide advice on importance of good health of adolescent and postmenopausal
           women.
     -     Identification and management of health problems of post-menopausal women.
     -     Planning and intervention program of social, educational and health needs of
           adolescent girls and menopausal women.
     -     Provide education regarding rights and confidentiality of women’s health,
           specifically   related to reproductive function, sexuality, contraception and safe
           abortion.
     -     Provide advice on geriatric problems.


     Reproductive Tract and ‘HIV’ Infection


     -     Provide advice on management of RTI and HIV infections in Indian women of
           reproductive age group.



                                                                                             6
   -   Provide advice on management of HIV infections in pregnancy, relationship of
       RTI and HIV with gynaecological disorders.
   -   Planning and implementation of preventive strategies.


Medico-legal Aspects
   -   Correct application of various Acts and Laws while practicing obstetrics and
       gynaecology, particularly MTP Act and sterilization, Preconception and P.N.D.T.
       Act.
   -   Implement proper recording of facts about history, examination findings,
       investigation reports and treatment administered in all patients.
   -   Implement the steps recommended for examination and management of rape
       cases.
   -   Follow proper procedures in the event of death of a patient.


   Environment and Health


   -   Follow proper procedures in safe disposal of human body fluids and other
       materials.
   -   Follow proper procedures and universal precautions in examination and surgical
       procedures for the prevention of HIV and other diseases.



                                          Syllabus
Course Contents:

Paper I
1. Basic Sciences
   -   Normal and abnormal development, structure and function (female and male)
       urogenital system and female breast.
   -   Applied Anatomy of genito-urinary system, abdomen, pelvis, pelvic floor,
       anterior abdominal wall, upper thigh (inguinal ligament, inguinal canal, vulva,
       rectum and anal canal).
   -   Physiology of spermatogenesis.
   -   Endocrinology related to male and female reproduction (Neurotransmitters).
   -   Anatomy and physiology of urinary and lower GI (Rectum / anal canal) tract.
   -   Development, structure and function of placenta, umbilical cord and amniotic
       fluid.
   -   Anatomical and physiological changes in female genital tract during pregnancy.
   -   Anatomy of fetus, fetal growth and development, fetal physiology and fetal
       circulation.
   -   Physiological and neuro-endocrinal changes during puberty, adolescence,
       menstruation, ovulation, fertilization, climacteric and menopause.



                                                                                        7
   -   Biochemical and endocrine changes during pregnancy, including systemic
       changes in cardiovascular, hematological, renal hepatic, renal, hepatic and other
       systems.
   -   Biophysical and biochemical changes in uterus and cervix during pregnancy and
       labor.
   -   Pharmacology of identified drugs used during pregnancy, labour, post-partum
       period in reference to their absorption, distribution, excretion, (hepatic)
       metabolism, transfer of the drugs across the placenta, effect of the drugs (used) on
       labor, on fetus, their excretion through breast milk.
   -   Mechanism of action, excretion, metabolism of identified drugs used in the
       management of Gynaecological disorder.
   -   Role of hormones in Obstetrics and Gynaecology.
   -   Markers in Obstetrics & Gynaecology - Non-neoplastic and neoplastic diseases
   -   Pathophysiology of ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, vagina and external
       genitalia in healthy and diseased conditions.
   -   Normal and abnormal pathology of placenta, umbilical cord, amniotic fluid and
       fetus.
   -   Normal and abnormal microbiology of genital tract. Bacterial, viral and parasitical
       infections responsible for maternal, fetal and gynaecological disorders.
   -   Humoral and cellular immunology in Obstetrics & Gynaecology.
   -   Gametogenesis, fertilization, implantation and early development of embryo.
   -   Normal Pregnancy, physiological changes during pregnancy, labor and
       pauperism.
   -   Immunology of pregnancy.
   -   Lactation.


2. Medical Genetics


   -   Basic medical genetics including cytogenetics.
   -   Pattern of inheritance
   -   Chromosomal abnormalities - types, incidence, diagnosis, management and
       recurrence risk.
   -   General principles of Teratology.
   -   Screening, counseling and prevention of developmental abnormalities.
   -   Birth defects - genetics, teratology and counseling.


Paper II

       Clinical obstetrics
       1. Antenatal Care:




                                                                                         8
-   Prenatal care of normal pregnancy including examination, nutrition, immunization
    and follow up.
-   Identification and management of complications and complicated of pregnancy –
    abortion, ectopic pregnancy, vesicular mole, Gestational trophoblastic Diseases,
    hyperemesis gravidarum, multiple pregnancy, antipartum hemorrhage, pregnancy
    induced hypertension, preeclampsia, eclampsia, Other associated hypertensive
    disorders, Anemia, Rh incompatibility, diabetes, heart disease, renal and hepatic
    diseases, preterm - post term pregnancies, intrauterine fetal growth retardation,
-   Neurological, hematological, dermatological diseases, immunological disorders
    and other medical and surgical disorders/problems associated with pregnancy,
    Multiple pregnancies, Hydramnios, Oligoamnios.
-   Diagnosis of contracted pelvis (CPD) and its management.
-   High-risk pregnancy
   Pregnancy associated with complications, medical and surgical problems.
   Prolonged gestation.
   Preterm labor, premature rupture of membranes.
   Blood group incompatibilities.
   Recurrent pregnancy wastage.
-   Evaluation of fetal and maternal health in complicated pregnancy by making use
    of diagnostic modalities including modern once (USG, Doppler, Electronic
    monitors) and plan for safe delivery for mother and fetus. Identifying fetus at risk
    and its management. Prenatal diagnostic modalities including modern ones.
-   Infections in pregnancy (bacterial, viral, fungal, protozoan)
   Malaria, Toxoplasmosis.
   Viral – Rubella, CMV, Herpes, HIV, Hepatic viral infections (B, C etc)
   Sexually Transmitted Infections (STDs)
   Mother to fetal transmission of infections.
-   Identification and management of fetal malpositions and malpresentations.
-   Management of pregnancies complicated by medical, surgical (with other
    specialties as required) and gynecological diseases.
   Anemia, hematological disorders
   Respiratory, Heart, Renal, Liver, skin diseases.
   Gastrointestinal, Hypertensive, Autoimmune, Endocrine disorders.
   Associated Surgical Problems.
    Acute Abdomen (surgical emergencies - appendicitis and GI emergencies).
    Other associated surgical problems.
   Gynaecological disorders associate with pregnancy - congenital genital tract
    developmental anomalies, Gynaec pathologies - fibroid uterus, Ca Cx, genital
    prolapse etc.
   Prenatal diagnosis (of fetal problems and abnormalities), treatment – Fetal therapy
   M.T.P, PC & P.N.D.T Act etc


                                                                                        9
      National health MCH programs, social obstetrics and vital statistics
      Recent advances in Obstetrics.


2. Intra-partum care:


   -   Normal labor - mechanism and management.
   -   Partographic monitoring of labor progress, recognition of abnormal labor and its
       appropriate management.
   -   Identification and conduct of abnormal labor and complicated delivery - breech,
       forceps delivery, caesarian section, destructive operations.
   -   Induction and augmentation of labor.
   -   Management of abnormal labor - Abnormal pelvis, soft tissue abnormalities of
       birth canal, mal-presentation, mal-positions of fetus, abnormal uterine action,
       obstructed labor and other distocias.
   -   Analgesia and anaesthesia in labor.
   -   Maternal and fetal monitoring in normal and abnormal labor (including electronic
       fetal monitoring).
   -   Identification and management of intrapartum complications, Cord presentation,
       complication of 3rd stage of labor - retained placenta, inversion of uterus, rupture
       of uterus, post partum hemorrhage.


3. Post Partum


   -   Complication of 3rd stage of labor retained placenta, inversion of uterus, post
       partum hemorrhage, rupture of uterus, Management of primary and secondary
       post-partum hemorrhage, retained placenta, uterine inversion. Post-partum
       collapse, amniotic fluid embolism
   -   Identification and management of genital tract trauma - perineal tear,
       cervical/vaginal tear, episiotomy complications, rupture uterus.
   -   Management of critically ill woman.
   -   Post partum shock, sepsis and psychosis.
   -   Postpartum contraception.
       Breast feeding practice; counseling and importance of breast-feeding. Problems in
       breast-feeding and their management, Baby friendly practices.
   -   Problems of newborn - at birth (resuscitation), management of early neonatal
       problems.
   -   Normal and abnormal purpureum - sepsis, thrombophlebitis, mastitis, psychosis.
       Hematological problems in Obstetrics including coagulation disorders. Use of
       blood and blood components/products.


4. Operative Obstetrics:



                                                                                        10
   -   Decision-making, technique and management of complications.
   -   Vaginal instrumental delivery, Caesarian section, Obst. Hysterectomy, destructive
       operations, manipulations (External/internal podalic version, manual removal of
       placenta etc)
   -   Medical Termination of Pregnancy - safe abortion - selection of cases, technique
       and management of complication. MTP law.


5. New Born


       1. Care of new born: Normal and high risk new born (including NICU care).
       2. Asphyxia and neonatal resuscitation.
       3. Neonatal sepsis - prevention, detection and management.
       4. Neonatal hyper - bilirubinemia - investigation and management.
       5. Birth trauma - Detection and management.
       6. Detection and management of fetal/neonatal malformation.
       7. Management of common neonatal problems.


Paper III


Clinical Gynaecology and Fertility Regulation


   -   Epidemiology and etiopathogenesis of gynaecological disorders.
   -   Diagnostic modalities and management of common benign and malignant
       gynaecological diseases (diseases of genital tract):
       Fibroid uterus
       Endometriosis and adenomyosis
       Endometrial hyperplasia
       Genital prolapse (uterine and vaginal)
       Cervical erosion, cervicitis, cervical polyps, cervical neoplasia.
       Vaginal cysts, vaginal infections, vaginal neoplasia (VIN)
       Benign Ovarian pathologies
       Malignant genital neoplasia - of ovary, Fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, vagina,
       vulva and Gestational Trophoblastic diseases, Cancer Breast.
   -   Diagnosis and surgical management of clinical conditions related to congenital
       malformations of genital tract. Reconstructive surgery in gynaecology.
   -   Intersex, ambiguous sex and chromosomal abnormalities.
   -   Reproductive endocrinology: Evaluation of Primary/secondary Amenorrhea,
       management of Hyperprolactinemia, Hirsutism, Chronic an-ovulation, PCOD,
       thyroid and other endocrine dysfunctions.
   -   Infertility - Evaluation and management
                 Methods of Ovulation Induction



                                                                                     11
                  Tubal (Micro) surgery
                  Management of immunological factors of Infertility
                  Male infertility
                  Obesity and other Infertility problems.
                  (Introductory knowledge of) Advanced Assisted Reproductive
                   Techniques (ART)
   - Reproductive tract Infections: prevention, diagnosis and treatment.
                  STD
                  HIV
                  Other Infections
                  Genital Tuberculosis.
       - Principles of radiotherapy and chemotherapy in gynaecological malignancies.
        Choice, schedule of administration and complications of such therapies.
   -    Rational approach in diagnosis and management of endocrinal abnormalities such
        as: menstrual abnormalities, amenorrhea (primary/secondary), dysfunctional
        uterine bleeding, polycystic ovarian disease, hyperprolactinemia (galoctorrhea),
        hyperandrogenism, thyroid - pituitary - adrenal disorders, menopause and its
        treatment (HRT).
   -    Urological problems in Gynaecology - Diagnosis and management.
                  Urinary tract infection
                  Urogenital Fistulae
                  Incontinence
                  Other urological problems
   -    Orthopedic problems in Gynaecology.
   -    Menopause: management (HRT) and prevention of its complications.
   -    Endoscopy (Laparoscopy - Hysteroscopy)
                  Diagnostic and simple therapeutic procedures (PG students must be
                   trained to do these procedures)
                  Recent advances in gynaecology - Diagnostic and therapeutic
                  Pediatric, Adolescent and Geriatric Gyanecology
                  Introduction to Advance Operative procedures.
Operative Gynaecology
                  Abdominal and Vaginal Hysterectomy
                  Surgical Procedures for genital prolapse, fibromyoma, endometriosis,
                   ovarian, adenexal, uterine, cervical, vaginal and vulval pathologies.
                  Surgical treatment for urinary and other fistulae, Urinary incontinence
                  Operative Endoscopy


Family Welfare and Demography
   -    Definition of demography and its importance in Obstetrics and Gynaecology.




                                                                                           12
   -   Statistics regarding maternal mortality, perinatal mortality/morbidity, birth rate,
       fertility rate.
   -   Organizational and operational aspects of National health policies and programs,
       in relation to population and family welfare including RCH.
   -   Various temporary and permanent methods of male and female contraceptive
       methods.
   -   Knowledge of in contraceptive techniques (including recent developments).
       1.       Temporary methods
       2.       Permanent Methods.
       3.       Recent advances in contraceptive technology
   -   Provide adequate services to service seekers of contraception including follow up.
   -   Medical Termination of Pregnancy: Act, its implementation, providing safe and
       adequate services.
   -   Demography and population dynamics.
   -   Contraception (fertility control)


Male and Female Infertility


   -   History taking, examination and investigation.
   -   Causes and management of male infertility.
   -   Indications, procedures of Assisted Reproductive Techniques in relation to male
       infertility problems.



               TEACHING AND LEARNING METHODS


Postgraduate Training
Teaching methodology should be imparted to the students through:


      Lectures, seminars, symposia, Inter- and intra- departmental meetings (clinic-
       pathological,     Radio-diagnosis,   Radiotherapy,     Anaesthesia,     Pediatrics/
       Neonatology), maternal morbidity/mortality meetings and journal club. Records
       of these are to be maintained by the department.
      By encouraging and allowing the students to attend and actively participate in
       CMEs, Conferences by presenting papers.
      Maintenance of log book: Log books shall be checked and assessed periodically
       by the faculty members imparting the training.
      Writing thesis following appropriate research methodology, ethical clearance and
       good clinical practice guidelines.
      The postgraduate students shall be required to participate in the teaching and
       training programme of undergraduate students and interns.



                                                                                       13
         A postgraduate student of a postgraduate degree course in broad specialities/super
          specialities would be required to present one poster presentation, to read one
          paper at a national/state conference and to present one research paper which
          should be published/accepted for publication/sent for publication during the
          period of his postgraduate studies so as to make him eligible to appear at the
          postgraduate degree examination.
         Department should encourage e-learning activities.

Practical and Clinical Training


         Emphasis should be self learning, group discussions and case presentations.
         Student should be trained about proper History taking, Clinical examination,
          advising / ordering relevant investigations, their interpretation and instituting
          medical / surgical management by posting students in OPD, specialty clinics,
          wards, operation theaters, Labor room, family planning clinics and other
          departments like anesthesiology, neonatology, radiology/ radiotherapy. Students
          should be able to perform and interpret ultra - sonography in Obstetrics and
          Gynaecology, NST, Partogram


Rotations:
         Details of 3 years posting in the PG programme (6 terms of 6 months each)


   a. Allied posts should be done during the course – for 8 weeks


   i.         Neonatology               - 2 weeks
   ii.        Anaesthesia               - 2 weeks
   iii.       Radiology/Radiotherapy - 2 weeks
   iv.        Surgery                   - 2 weeks
   v.         Oncology                  - 2 weeks


  b. Details of training in the subject during resident posting
         The student should attend to the duties (Routine and emergency):
        Out patient Department and special clinics
        Inpatients
        Operation Theater
        Labor Room


Writing clinical notes regularly and maintains records.


 1st term -                     working under supervision of senior residents and
                                teaching faculty.




                                                                                         14
 2nd & 3rd term-                 Besides   patient   care   in   O.P.D.,   wards,   Casualty
                                 and labor room, carrying out minor operations under
                                 supervision and assisting in major operation.
   th   th     th
 4 5 & 6 term -                  independent duties in management of patient including
                                 major operations under supervision of teaching faculty
 c.          Surgeries to be done during PG training. (Details in the Syllabus)


During the training programme, patient safety is of paramount importance;
therefore, skills are to be learnt initially on the models, later to be performed under
supervision followed by performing independently; for this purpose, provision of
surgical skills laboratories in medical colleges is mandatory.



                                     ASSESSMENT
FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT, during the training includes


Formative assessment should be continual and should assess medical knowledge,
patient care, procedural & academic skills, interpersonal skills, professionalism, self
directed learning and ability to practice in the system.

General Principles

Internal Assessment should be frequent, cover all domains of learning and used to
provide feedback to improve learning; it should also cover professionalism and
communication skills. The Internal Assessment should be conducted in theory and
clinical examination.


Quarterly assessment during the MS training should be based on following
educational activities:


1. Journal based / recent advances learning
2. Patient based /Laboratory or Skill based learning
3. Self directed learning and teaching
4. Departmental and interdepartmental learning activity
5. External and Outreach Activities / CMEs


The student to be assessed periodically as per categories listed in postgraduate
student appraisal form (Annexure I).



SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT, ie., assessment at the end of training
The summative examination would be carried out as per the Rules given in
POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION REGULATIONS, 2000.


                                                                                          15
Postgraduate Examination shall be in three parts:

1.      Thesis


Every post graduate student shall carry out work on an assigned research project under
the guidance of a recognised Post Graduate Teacher, the result of which shall be written
up and submitted in the form of a Thesis. Work for writing the Thesis is aimed at
contributing to the development of a spirit of enquiry, besides exposing the post graduate
student to the techniques of research, critical analysis, acquaintance with the latest
advances in medical science and the manner of identifying and consulting available
literature.


Thesis shall be submitted at least six months before the Theory and Clinical / Practical
examination. The thesis shall be examined by a minimum of three examiners; one
internal and two external examiners, who shall not be the examiners for Theory and
Clinical examination. A post graduate student shall be allowed to appear for the Theory
and Practical/Clinical examination only after the acceptance of the Thesis by the
examiners.


2.      Theory Examination:
The examinations shall be organised on the basis of ‘Grading’or ‘Marking system’ to
evaluate and to certify post graduate student's level of knowledge, skill and competence
at the end of the training. Obtaining a minimum of 50% marks in ‘Theory’ as well as
‘Practical’ separately shall be mandatory for passing examination as a whole. The
examination for M.D./ MS shall be held at the end of 3rd academic year. An academic
term shall mean six month's training period.

There should be four theory papers, as given below:

Paper I:          Applied Basic sciences.
Paper II:         Obstetrics including social obstetrics and Diseases of New Born
Paper III:        Gynaecology including fertility regulation
Paper IV:         Recent Advances in Obstetrics & Gynaecology


3.      Clinical/Practical & oral/viva voce Examination: shall be as given below:
        a) Obstetrics:

              Clinical

                Long Case: 1 case
                2 cases with different problems

                Short Case/ Spot Case: 1 case

           Viva voce including:




                                                                                       16
                    Instruments

                    Pathology specimens
                    Drugs and X-rays, Sonography etc.
                    Dummy Pelvis

       b) Gynaecology:

         Clinical

             Long Case: 1 case
             2 cases with different problems

             Short Case/ Spot Case: 1 case

       Viva including:

                     Instruments

                     Pathology specimens

                     Drugs and X-rays, Sonography etc.

                     Family planning

Recommended Reading:
Books (latest edition)

Obstetrics

   1. William Textbook of Obstetrics
   2. High risk Obstetrics - James
   3. High risk pregnancy - Ian Donal
   4. Text book of Operative Obstetrics - Munro Kerr.
   5. Medical disorder in pregnancy - De Sweit
   6. High risk pregnancy - Arias
   7. A text book of Obstetrics - Thrnbull
   8. Text book of Obstetrics - Holland & Brews.
   9. Manual of Obstetrics - Daftary & Chakravarty
   Gynaecology
   1. Text book of Gynaecology - Novak
   2. Text book of Operative Gynaecology - Te-lindes
   3. Text book of operative gynaecology - Shaws
   4. Text book of Gynaecology and Reproductive Endocrinology - Speroft
   5. Text book of Obstetrics & Gynaecology - Dewhurst
   6. Manual of Gynaecological Oncology - Disai
   7. Text book of Gynaecology – Jaeffcot
 Journals
       03-05 international Journals and 02 national (all indexed) journals




                                                                             17
                                                                                       Annexure I
                   Postgraduate Students Appraisal Form
                          Pre / Para /Clinical Disciplines
Name of the Department/Unit      :
Name of the PG Student                   :
Period of Training                       : FROM…………………TO……………
 Sr.         PARTICULARS                 Not         Satisfactory    More Than        Remarks
No.                                  Satisfactory                    Satisfactory
                                       1 2 3           4 5 6           7 8 9
 1.    Journal based / recent
       advances learning
 2.    Patient based
       /Laboratory or Skill
       based learning
 3.    Self directed learning
       and teaching
 4.    Departmental and
       interdepartmental
       learning activity
 5.    External and Outreach
       Activities / CMEs
 6.    Thesis / Research work
 7.    Log Book Maintenance



Publications                                                                            Yes/ No

Remarks*______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________
________________
*REMARKS: Any significant positive or negative attributes of a postgraduate student to be mentioned.
For score less than 4 in any category, remediation must be suggested. Individual feedback to
postgraduate student is strongly recommended.




SIGNATURE OF ASSESSEE            SIGNATURE OF CONSULTANT                   SIGNATURE OF HOD




                                                                                                 18
