 NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION
 Postgraduate Medical Education Board

   D 11011/1/22/AC/Guidelines/22   Date: 02-11-2022




GUIDELINES FOR COMPETENCY BASED
     POSTGRADUATE TRAINING
           PROGRAMME
                FOR
        M.D. IN PATHOLOGY




                                                      1
       GUIDELINES FOR COMPETENCY BASED
  POSTGRADUATE TRAINING PROGRAMME FOR MD IN
                  PATHOLOGY

Preamble
The purpose of PG education is to create specialists who would provide high quality health
care and advance the cause of science through research & training.


This programme is meant to standardize Pathology teaching at postgraduate level throughout
the country in order to achieve uniformity in teaching and create suitable manpower with
appropriate expertise. The postgraduate student in pathology should be sufficiently trained,
professionally competent and confident in handling, and processing, and diagnosis related to
histopathology (surgical pathology), cytopathology, and hematology with reasonable working
knowledge in blood banking, laboratory medicine, medical statistics, and ancillary techniques
with understanding of general principles and methodology.


The purpose of this document is to provide teachers and learners illustrative guidelines to
achieve defined outcomes through learning and assessment. This document was prepared by
various subject-content specialists. The Reconciliation Board cum Expert group of NMC has
attempted to render uniformity without compromise to the purpose and content of the
document. Compromise in purity of syntax has been made in order to preserve the purpose and
content. This has necessitated retention of “domains of learning” under the heading
“competencies”.


           SUBJECT SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES
At the end of the MD training programme in Pathology, the student should achieve the
following goals:

1. Knowledge of Pathology
1.1.Make a diagnosis based on histopathology (surgical pathology) and cytopathology
   specimens, blood and bone marrow examination and various tests of Laboratory Medicine
   (clinical pathology, clinical biochemistry) as well as Blood Banking (Transfusion
   Medicine).


                                                                                           2
1.2.Interpret clinical and laboratory data with reasonable accuracy and prepare a succinct and
   lucid report
1.3.Compose reports following standard protocols including synoptic reporting
1.4.Interpret and correlate clinical and laboratory data so that clinical manifestations of diseases
   can be explained.
1.5.Advise on the selection of appropriate specimens and tests necessary to arrive at a diagnosis
   in a problematic case including molecular tests.
1.6.Correlate clinical and laboratory findings with pathology findings at autopsy, identify
   miscorrelations and the causes of death due to diseases (apart from purely metabolic
   causes).
1.7.Maintain quality control of all tests by being part of Internal Quality Control Monitoring
   program.
1.8.Make and record observations systematically and maintain accurate records of tests and
   their results for reasonable periods of time. Identify problems in the laboratory, offer
   solutions thereof and maintain a high order of quality control.
1.9.Should be aware of safe and effective disposal of laboratory waste and ensure minimization
   risk of exposure to infection and accidents to laboratory personnel.

2. Teaching and training
2.1.Should be able to teach Pathology to undergraduates, postgraduates, nurses and
   paramedical staff including laboratory personnel.
2.2.The postgraduate student should be able to teach effectively and assess undergraduate
   medical and allied health science students so that they become competent healthcare
   professionals.

3. Research
3.1.Plan, execute, analyze, and present research work independently or as part of a team.
3.2.The postgraduate student in Pathology should acquire knowledge and skills to be able to
   conduct a research project from the planning to the publication stage and become a life-
   long learner.

4. Professionalism, Ethics and Communication skills
4.1.The postgraduate student should learn and apply principles of professionalism, ethics, and
   effective communication in conduct of routine pathology services, research, and routine
   work.

                                                                                                  3
                    SUBJECT SPECIFIC COMPETENCIES

A.   COGNITIVE DOMAIN
A postgraduate student upon successfully qualifying the MD (Pathology) examination
should have acquired the following BROAD theoretical competencies and should be:

 ●     Capable of offering an accurate diagnostic opinion in a given clinical situation with an
       appropriate and relevant sample of tissue, blood, body fluid, etc. for the purpose of
       diagnosis.
 ●     Conversant with the standard operating procedures of various laboratories including
       histopathology, cytopathology, hematology and laboratory medicine
 ●     Able to teach and share his knowledge and competence with others. The student should
       be imparted training in teaching methods in the subject which may enable the student
       to take up teaching assignments in Medical Colleges/Institutes.
 ●     Capable of pursuing clinical and laboratory-based research. He/she should be
       introduced to basic research methodology so that he/she can conduct fundamental and
       applied research.

At the end of the course, the student should have acquired the following competencies as a
diagnostician:
Surgical pathology
 ●     Be conversant in the histogenesis and pathophysiological processes associated with
       various diseases.
 ●     Should be able to identify problems in the histopathology laboratory and offer viable
       solutions.
 ●     Possess the background knowledge necessary for the evaluation and reporting of
       Surgical Pathology.
 ●     Conversant with the various equipment used in the histopathology laboratory.
 ●     Should have knowledge of automation and quality assurance in histopathology.
Cytopathology
 ●     Possess the background knowledge necessary for the evaluation and reporting of
       Cytopathology.




                                                                                             4
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with, and guide clinical/radiology residents in keeping with the
      clinical information on the choice of site, collection, preservation, transport, type of
      preparation and method of obtaining various cytological specimens.
 ●    Conversant with the various equipment used in the cytopathology laboratory.
 ●    Should have knowledge of automation and quality assurance in cytopathology.


Hematology
 ●    Demonstrate ability to utilize the principles of the practice of Hematology for the
      planning of tests, interpretation, and diagnosis of diseases of the blood and bone
      marrow.
 ●    Conversant with the various equipment used in the hematology laboratory.
 ●    Should have knowledge of automation and quality assurance in hematology.
Laboratory medicine
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with the normal range of values of the chemical content of
      body fluids, significance of altered values, and interpretation thereof.
 ●    Possess knowledge of the following specialized organ function tests and relative
      utility and limitations of each and significance of altered values:
      (i)     Renal function test
      (ii)    Liver function test
      (iii)   Endocrine function test
      (iv)    Tests for malabsorption
 ●    Principles, advantage and disadvantages, scope, and limitation of automation in
      laboratory.
 ●    Learn the principle and methodology of quality control in the laboratory.
Transfusion medicine
 ●    Possess knowledge of basic immunology, ABO and Rh groups, minor blood groups
      and their clinical significance, transfusion therapy, pre-transfusion testing, transfusion
      related infections, transfusion reactions and quality control in blood bank.
Autopsy pathology
 ●    Conversant with the technique of autopsy.
 ●    Possess sufficient understanding of the various disease processes so that meaningful
      clinico-pathological correlation can be made.




                                                                                              5
Immunopathology
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with current concepts of structure and function of the
      immune system, its aberrations, and mechanisms thereof.
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with the scope, principles, limitations, and interpretations of
      the results of ELISA techniques, HLA typing, immunofluorescence, and
      immunoelectrophoresis.
Immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with the principles and procedures of performing
      immunohistochemistry including automation in procedure and interpretation.
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with the principles and procedures of performing flow
      cytometry.
Cytogenetics and Molecular biology
●     Demonstrate familiarity with the principles of molecular biopsy especially related to
      the understanding of disease processes and its use in various diagnostic tests at least
      including but not limited to in-situ hybridization, polymerase chain reaction, Sanger
      Sequencing and Next generation sequencing.
Electron microscopy
●     Demonstrate familiarity with the principles and techniques of electron microscopy and
      the working of the electron microscope.
●     Demonstrate familiarity with the tissue processing and staining methods for electron
      microscopy, including immune-labelling techniques and use of semi-thin sections.
Enzyme histochemistry
●     Demonstrate familiarity with the principles, use and interpretations of common
      enzyme histochemical procedures.
Quality Control
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with various quality control programmes running in the
      department, both internal and external quality.
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with inert and intra assay variations, batch variations,
      validation of chemicals and instruments.
Laboratory Safety and Good clinical lab practices
 ●    Demonstrate familiarity with good lab practices and safety, record maintenance of
      capital equipment and consumables, purchase specifications, approximate costs of
      reagents and equipment, maintenance of store logbooks, etc.

                                                                                                6
Biomedical Waste Management
     ●      Demonstrate familiarity with disposal methods for each specimen, reagents,
            instruments, autoclaving techniques, recycling of products and e-waste.


At the end of the course, the student should have acquired the following competencies as
a teacher:
 ●         Demonstrate familiarity with different modes, methods, and principles of teaching
           including microteaching.

At the end of the course, the student should have acquired the following competencies as
a researcher:
     ●      Conversant with the principles of basic and applied research methodology, literature
            search, study design, sample size estimation, selection of controls, and appropriate
            application of medical statistics.
     ●      Possess knowledge about the methods of writing thesis and/or a research paper with
            the prescribed instructions, as expected of international standards.
     ●      Conversant with the use of digital slide imaging, algorithms to evaluate findings in
            imaging, morphometry, and application of artificial intelligence.



B.        AFFECTIVE DOMAIN
1.       The student will show integrity, accountability, respect, compassion and dedicated patient
         care. The student will demonstrate a commitment to excellence and continuous
         professional development.

2.       The student should demonstrate a commitment to ethical principles relating to providing
         patient care, confidentiality of patient information and informed consent.

3.       The student should show sensitivity and responsiveness to patients’ culture, age, gender
         and disabilities.

4.       The student should demonstrate a commitment to ethical principles relating to research
         conduct and research publication.




                                                                                                   7
C. PSYCHOMOTOR DOMAIN

1.   Able to perform grossing of biopsy and surgical specimens including gross diagnosis and
     taking appropriate sections/ samples necessary for diagnosis, comprehensive staging, and
     ancillary testing.
2.   Conversant in histopathology tissue processing techniques and troubleshooting, cutting of
     paraffin    and      frozen   sections,   making   imprint   smears,   and   staining,   and
     immunohistochemistry.
3.   Able to collect specimens by routinely performing non-invasive out-patient procedures
     such as venipuncture, finger-prick, fine needle aspiration of superficial lumps and bone-
     marrow aspirates, making smears and staining, and provide appropriate guidance to
     colleagues performing procedure such as a biopsy or an imaging guided biopsy including
     on-site microscopic assessment of specimen adequacy.
4.   Perform an autopsy, dissect various organ complexes and display the gross findings.
5.   Conversant with the function, handling, and routine care of equipment in the laboratory
     and quality assurance.
6.   Able to teach and share his knowledge and competence with others. The student should be
     imparted training in teaching methods in the subject which may enable the student to take
     up teaching assignments in Medical Colleges/Institutes.
7.   Able to pursue clinical and laboratory-based research. He/she should be introduced to basic
     research methodology so that he/she can independently conduct fundamental and applied
     research.

                                               Syllabus
     Course contents:

It is difficult to give a precise outline of the Course Contents for post graduate training. A
postgraduate is supposed to acquire not only the professional competence of a well-trained
specialist but also academic maturity, a capacity to reason and critically analyze scientific data
as well as to keep himself abreast of the latest developments in the field of Pathology and
related sciences. The study of Anatomic Pathology includes all aspects of Pathology as
encompassed in the branches of General and Systemic Pathology. Only the broad outlines are
provided.


     A. COGNITIVE DOMAIN

                                                                                                8
A) General Pathology:
Normal cell and tissue structure and function:
●   The changes in cellular structure and function in diseases.
●   Causes of disease, its pathogenesis, reaction of cells, tissues, organ systems, and the body
    to various sub lethal and lethal injuries.
●   Cellular adaptation, cell injury, and cell death.
●   Mechanism, morphology and examples of cell injury, necrosis, apoptosis, autophagy, and
    newer forms of cell death including necroptosis and pyroptosis.
●   Sub cellular and cellular responses and adaptation to injury.
●   Intracellular and intercellular accumulations, pathological calcification, and cell aging.
Acute and chronic inflammation:
●   Vascular and cellular events in acute inflammation, chemical mediators, outcome, and
    morphological patterns of acute inflammation.
●   Chronic inflammation with special reference to granulomatous inflammation.
●   Systemic effects and effects of deranged inflammation.
●   Tissue renewal and repair: Regeneration healing and fibrosis.
● Control of normal cell proliferation and tissue growth, mechanism of tissue regeneration,
    repair by healing and fibrosis.
● Extracellular matrix and cell matrix interactions.
Hemodynamic disorders, thromboembolic disease, and shock:
● Edema, hyperemia, congestion, and hemorrhage.
● Normal Hemostasis, thrombosis, DIC, embolism, infarction, and shock.
Genetic Disorders
● Principles of genetics, normal karyotyping.
● Mutations, Mendelian disorders, disorders with multifactorial inheritance cytogenetic
    disorders involving autosomes and sex chromosomes.
● Single gene disorders with nonclassic inheritance.
● Diagnosis of genetic disorders involving molecular and genetic techniques.
Neoplasia
● Definition, nomenclature, and biology of tumor growth
● Molecular basis of cancer with special reference to carcinogenic agents and molecular
    basis of multistep carcinogenesis.
● Epidemiology and clinical features of tumors.


                                                                                                 9
● Grading, staging and laboratory diagnosis of cancer.
Infectious Diseases
● Pathology and general principles of microbial pathogenesis, special techniques for
   diagnosing bacterial, fungal, parasitic, and viral infections.
Environmental and nutritional pathology
● Common environmental and occupational exposures leading on to diseases.
● Nutritional deficiencies and obesity related disorders.
Disease of Infancy and Childhood
● Congenital anomalies, birth injuries, diseases of neonates, inborn errors of metabolism,
   tumor, and tumor like lesions of infancy and childhood.
Immunopathology
● Innate immunity- Role of phagocytic cells, complement, mast cells & humoral
   mechanisms.
● Specific Acquired Immunity- Details about antibody production & action, Brief
   principles about memory, Ag specificity & vaccination.
● Cell involved in Immune response- T- Lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes, macrophages,
   dendritic cells, and natural-killer cells.
● Cytokines with details about their properties and functions.
● Structure and function of histocompatibility molecules and disease association.
● Disorders of the immune system.
● All hypersensitivity reactions.
● Autoimmune disorders with special reference to SLE, Rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren’s
   syndrome, systemic sclerosis, polyarteritis nodosa and other vasculitides, Mixed
   connective tissue disorders and inflammatory disorders.
● Immunodeficiency syndrome – Acquired with emphasis on AIDS.
● Amyloidosis including pathogenesis, special stains & clinical correlation.
● Transplant rejection in detail.
● Graft vs Host Disease.
B) Systemic Pathology:
The study of normal structure and function of various organ systems and the etiopathogenesis,
gross and microscopic alterations of structure of these organ systems in disease and functional
correlation with clinical features.




                                                                                            10
Blood vessels, lymphatic and veins
● Normal morphology, congenital anomalies, atherosclerosis, hypertensive vascular disease.
● Inflammatory and neoplastic diseases of all the vessels.
Heart
● Normal morphology, its blood supply and effect of aging on heart.
● Ischemic, Hypertensive, valvular, congenital heart diseases.
● Cardiomyopathies
● Myocardial disorders
● Pericardial diseases.
● Tumors of the heart.
Lungs and Mediastinum
● Congenital anomalies
● Obstructive and restrictive pulmonary diseases
● Diseases of vascular origin
● Infections of Lung
● Infections of Mediastinum
● Tumors of lung
● Lung transplantation
● Diseases of pleura
● Thymus – Developmental, autoimmune, and inflammatory disorder and tumors.
Head and Neck
● Oral cavity: - inflammatory disease, Preneoplastic lesions and tumors.
● Diseases of teeth and supporting structures.
● Upper airways and ear – congenital anomalies, infections, and tumors.
● Salivary glands – Infections autoimmune disorders and tumors.
Gastrointestinal Tract
● Congenital anomalies, infections, inflammatory and vascular disorders and tumors of
   esophagus, stomach, small and large intestines, appendix, and anal canal.
● Diseases of the peritoneum, Omentum and Mesentery Retroperitoneum.
● Inflammatory and neoplastic lesions.
Liver
● Normal morphology with general features of hepatic disease including LFTs.
● Infectious, autoimmune drug induced metabolic and circulatory disorders of liver.


                                                                                        11
● Hepatic diseases associated with pregnancy, neonates, organ and bone marrow
   transplantation.
● Liver transplantation pathology.
● Cysts, Nodules, and tumors of liver.
Biliary tract
● Congenital anomalies, injuries, Infection, inflammation, of Gallstones and tumors of gall
   bladder and extra hepatic bile ducts. Pancreas.
● Congenital anomalies, pancreatitis, and neoplasms of pancreas.
Kidney
● Clinical manifestations of renal diseases
● Congenital anomalies
● Diseases affecting glomeruli, tubules, interstitium and blood vessels.
● Cystic diseases of kidney
● Nephrolithiasis
● Tumors of kidney
● Kidney Transplant pathology
Lower urinary tract and male genital system
● Congenital anomalies, inflammation and tumors of bladder, ureter, urethra, penis, testis,
   epididymis, and Scrotum.
● Inflammation, enlargement, and tumors of prostate.
Female genital tract
● Physiology, cytology and histology of female genital tract, menstrual disorders, and
   hormonal abnormalities.
● Congenital anomalies, inflammation, preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions of vulva,
   vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries and mesonephron.
● Gestational and placental disorders.
Breast
● Inflammations, benign epithelial lesions, and tumors of the breast.
● Diseases of male breast.
Endocrine System
● Normal hormonal levels and functions of all the endocrine glands.
● Hypo and hyperactivity of glands of endocrine system i.e., pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid,
   pancreas, adrenals, and pineal gland.


                                                                                           12
 ● Autoimmune diseases, inflammations and tumors affecting these glands,
 ● Neuroendocrine tumors,
 Skin and Subcutaneous tissue
 ● Disorders of pigmentation and melanocytes,
 ● Inflammatory, vesiculobullous, and infectious disease,
 ● Proliferative lesions and Tumors of the epidermis, dermis, and skin appendage.
 Musculoskeletal system
 ● Bone Modelling, growth, and development, genetic and acquired abnormalities in bone
     cells, matrix and structure, factures, necrosis and infections of bones, tumors and tumor-
     like lesions,
 ● Joints: Arthritis, tumor, and tumor-like lesions.
 ● Soft tissue: Tumors and tumor=like lesions.
 Peripheral nerves and skeletal muscles
 ● General reactions of motor units.
 ● Inflammatory, infectious, hereditary, metabolic, and traumatic neuropathies.
 ● Atrophy, dystrophy, myopathies of the skeletal muscles.
 ● Diseases of neuromuscular junction.
 ● Tumors of peripheral nerves and skeletal muscles.
 Skull and Central Nervous System
 ● Degenerative, metabolic, toxic, demyelinating, infectious, cerebrovascular malformations,
     and traumatic injuries.
 ● Tumors.
 Eye and Orbit
 ● Infections, inflammatory, congenital diseases and neoplasms of orbit, eyelid, conjunctiva
     sclera, uvea, cornea, retina, and optic nerves.
C) Hematology and Transfusion medicine
The study of Hematology includes all aspects of the diseases of the blood and bone marrow.
This would involve the study of the normal, and the causes of diseases and the changes thereof.
Biology of stem cell and Hematopoiesis
● Overview of stem cell biology and cellular biology of hematopoiesis.
● Transcription factors and humoral regulation in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.
● Interaction between hematopoietic stem cells, progenitor cell and stromal compartment of
    bone marrow.


                                                                                              13
● Stem cell homing & mobilization.
Erythroid maturation, differentiation, and abnormality
● Pathobiology of human erythrocyte & Hemoglobin Anemia.
● Approach to anemia in adults and children in: Clinical correlation & diagnostic modalities.
● Classification of anemias (Morphological, pathophysiological, and based on erythropoiesis
    i.e., proliferative vs non-proliferative).
● Iron deficiency anemia including iron metabolism and differential diagnosis from other
    microcytic hypochromic anemias.
● Disorder of iron metabolism including iron overload.
● Anemia of chronic disorders with special reference to infections, collagen vascular
    disorders, inflammation etc.
● Megaloblastic anemia and other causes of megaloblastosis.
● Definition, approach, and classification of hemolytic anemia.
● Lab diagnosis of Hemoglobin disorders and hereditary anemia like Thalassemia and related
    hemoglobinopathies, sickle cell anemia.
● Hemoglobin associated with altered Oxygen affinity.
● Red blood cell enzymopathy, membrane disorder, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, non-
    immune hemolytic anemia, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
● Approach to Pancytopenia/ Cytopenia.
● Bone marrow failure syndrome.
● Porphyria.
WBC disorders, complement and immunoglobin biology
● Normal granulopoiesis.
● Acquired and congenital disorders of phagocytosis (neutrophil, monocyte, eosinophil, and
    macrophages.
● Disorder of leukocyte number, function, and morphology.
Storage disorder
Hematological responses to Infections
 ● Viral disorders - Infectious mononucleosis, Hepatitis, and dengue.
 ● Parasitic infections - Malaria, Kala azar.
Hematological malignancies
● Conventional & molecular cytogenetic and immunohistochemical basis of hematological
    malignancies.


                                                                                          14
● Classification (WHO, ICC).
● Their basis and diagnostic approach to various hematological malignancies.
● Pathophysiology, prognostic factors, cytochemistry, cytogenetics of various leukemias.
● Pathophysiology and classification of MDS, MPN/MDS, myeloproliferative disorders.
● Pathophysiology of Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, Clinical staging of Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
● Role of molecular cytogenetics and immunohistochemistry in Hodgkin’s and Non-
   Hodgkin’s lymphoma and lymphoproliferative disorders.
● AIDS related and Transplant related lymphomas.
● Plasma cell dyscrasias and gammopathies.
● Mastocytosis.
● Role of chemotherapy and antineoplastic agents based on molecular mechanism of
   hematological malignancies, clinical use of hematopoietic growth factors.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
● Role and indications of HST, immunodeficiency state, hematological Malignancies and
   Non-hematological disorders.
● Practical aspect of umbilical cord stem cells transplantation.
● Peripheral stem cell collection.
● Role of stem cell in tissue repair.
● Complications of Hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
● Gene therapy and genetic engineering.
Prenatal diagnosis of genetic hematological diseases
Hemostasis & Thrombosis
● Megakaryocyte and platelet structure.
● Molecular basis of platelet function, activation.
● Role of blood vessel, coagulation system and fibrinolytic system in hemostasis.
● Clinical and lab evaluation of bleeding and coagulation disorders.
● Clinical & diagnostic aspects of factor deficiencies including hemophilia, von Willebrand
   disease, DIC, Vitamin K deficiency.
● Thrombotic and non-thrombotic purpura.
● Hereditary and acquired platelet disorders and its management.
● Thrombophilia (Inherited & acquired).
● Lab evaluation and management of hypercoagulable states.



                                                                                           15
Human blood group antigen and antibody and Immuno-hematology
● Selection of donor and screening..
● Principle, indication and storage of red blood cells, WBC, platelet, and plasma
   transfusion.
● Various methods of component separation and plasma derivatives with special reference to
   Fresh frozen plasma, cryo-precipitates, platelet concentrate, single donor plasma, albumin,
   and Immunoglobulin.
● Graft Rejection, GVH diseases, Transfusion Reactions, Blood grouping & cross
   matching.
● Blood bank audit.
● Apheresis
Hematological manifestations of systemic diseases
● Liver disorders, renal disorders, infections, cancers, parasitic diseases, AIDS, pregnancy,
   and surgical patients.
Spleen and its disorders
D) Laboratory Medicine (Clinical Pathology including Parasitology)
● Principles of testing, indications, values with ranges in normal and diseased states in
   relation to:
       o Liver function tests
       o Renal function tests
       o Endocrine function tests
       o Body fluid analysis including stool, urine, semen, CSF, etc.
● Principles of laboratory automation, trouble shooting, and quality assurance.
D) Special techniques
The student is expected to acquire a general acquaintance of techniques and principles and to
interpret data in the following fields:
● Immunopathology,
● Electron microscopy,
● Histochemistry,
● Immunohistochemistry,
● Cytogenetics and in-situ hybridization,
● Molecular Biology,
● Digital Pathology and image analysis,


                                                                                           16
● Maintenance of records,
● Information retrieval, use of Computer and Internet in medicine.
E) Instrumentation and automation
● Principles, indications, working, maintenance, and troubleshooting of equipment used in
    various laboratories:
       o Histopathology laboratory – Histopathology tissue processor, microtome, water
           batch, embedding station, Stainer, IHC Stainer, ultramicrotome, etc.
       o Microscopes – Immunofluorescence, FISH, Confocal, Electron, etc.
       o Cytopathology Laboratory – Centrifuge, Cytocentrifuge, Cytospin apparatus,
           liquid-based cytology, etc.
       o Hematology Laboratory – automated cell counter, flow cytometer, coagulometer,
           HPLC, Electrophoresis apparatus, immunoblot, etc.
       o Clinical Pathology –Photoelectric colorimeter, Spectrophotometer, pH meter,
           Centrifuge, Electrophoresis apparatus, ELISA Reader, chemiluminescence, etc.
       o Digital pathology – Whole slide scanners
       o Molecular pathology – PCR, Sanger sequencer, NGS sequencers, etc.
● Automation in Pathology.
● Good lab practices and safety, record maintenance of capital equipment and consumables,
    purchase specifications, approximate costs of reagents and equipment, maintenance of store
    logbooks, etc.
F) Quality assurance program
● Internal and external quality assurance methods.
● Intra assay variations, batch variations, validation of chemicals and instruments.
G) Establishment Act and Rules and regulations formed by Govt. or regulatory bodies
H) Biomedical Waste management
● Disposal methods for each specimen, reagents, instruments, autoclaving techniques,
    recycling of products and e-waste.
I) Biostatistics, Research Methodology and Clinical Epidemiology
J) Ethics and Medico legal aspects relevant to Pathology
K) Current topics and recent advances in pathology


    B. PSYCHOMOTOR DOMAIN




                                                                                           17
Demonstrate following predominant Psychomotor domain competencies
Sr. No.   Competency                                                                    Perform          under
                                                                                        supervision/ perform
                                                                                        independently/
                                                                                        Observation only
I.        HISTOPATHOLOGY (SURGICAL PATHOLOGY)
1.        Given the clinical and operative data, identify and systematically and Independently
          accurately describe the chief gross anatomic alterations in the
          surgically removed specimens and be able to correctly diagnose
          common lesions received on an average day from the surgical service
          of an average teaching hospital
2.        Perform a systematic gross examination of the tissues including the Independently
          taking of appropriate tissue sections and in special cases as in intestinal
          mucosal biopsies, muscle biopsies and nerve biopsies, demonstrate the
          orientation of tissues in paraffin blocks.
3.        Identify and systematically and accurately describe the chief histo- Independently
          morphological alterations in the tissue received in the surgical
          pathology service. He/she should also correctly interpret and correlate
          with the clinical data to diagnose routine surgical material received on
          an average day.
4.        Identify common problems in histopathology processing techniques Independently
          (poor fixation, delayed fixation, poor staining, etc.,) including
          automated tissue processing machine troubleshooting and rectify
          common problems
5.        Operate and maintain common equipment in the histopathology Perform                            under
          laboratory such as microtome, water bath, cryostat, tissue processor, supervision
          auto Stainer, etc.
6.        Process a tissue, make a paraffin block and cut sections of good quality Perform               under
          on a rotary microtome                                                         supervision
7.        Stain paraffin sections with hematoxylin and eosin stain and common Independently
          special stains needed for diagnosis
8.        Cut a frozen section, stain and interpret the slide in correlation with the Independently
          clinical data provided


                                                                                                  18
9.    Standardize and validate new antibodies for immunohistochemistry Independently
      with understanding of controls, clones, and dilutions
10.   Perform immunohistochemistry on paraffin sections using manual Independently
      method
11.   Identify common problems in immunohistochemistry procedure Independently
      (artifacts, inadequate retrieval, section floating, IHC failure, etc.,) and
      rectify such problems
12.   Decide on the appropriate immunohistochemical panels for diagnosis, Independently
      prognosis and predictive purposes in common disease conditions based
      on standard recommendations and interpret their results
13.   Write histopathology reports, including synoptic reports, wherever Independently
      needed, following protocols and international standards. The reports
      should be succinct and lucid, with clinical notes and advice, as
      necessary.
II    CYTOPATHOLOGY
1.    Perform fine needle aspiration of superficial lumps and make good Independently
      quality smears including collection of material for cell block
      preparation and decide on the type of fixative and stain in a given case
2.    Prepare and stain good quality smears for cytopathological Independently
      examination
3.    Provide appropriate guidance to colleagues performing procedure such Independently
      as a biopsy or an imaging guided biopsy including on-site microscopic
      assessment of specimen adequacy.
4.    Decide on the technique of collection, preservation, transport and Independently
      concentration of various exfoliative cytology specimens (such as
      filters, centrifuge, liquid-based cytology, cytospin, etc.)
5.    Perform on-site adequacy assessment in image guided sampling Independently
      procedures and decide on sample triage for routine diagnosis (type of
      preparation, stain, etc.) and ancillary tests including microbiological
      and molecular tests
6.    Diagnose common cases received in a routine cytopathology Independently
      laboratory and categorize them into negative, inconclusive and
      positive, using the correct technique of screening and dotting the slides


                                                                                    19
      for suspicious cells, correctly identify the type of tumor, if present, and
      the presence of organisms, fungi and parasites, if present
7.    Perform preparations (cytospin smears, liquid-based cytology, cell Observation only
      blocks, etc.) of common cytological samples using equipment such as
      centrifuge, cytocentrifuge and liquid based cytology apparatus
III   HEMATOLOGY
1.    Perform venipuncture for peripheral blood collection and decide on Independently
      appropriate collection tubes, storage, and anticoagulant based on
      indication
2.    Prepare good quality peripheral blood smears, stain and report Independently
      peripheral blood counts and other findings including reticulocyte and
      platelet counts on cell counter and manually
3.    Perform bone marrow aspirates and biopsy, prepare good quality Perform                        under
      smears and imprints                                                           supervision
4.    Perform bone marrow aspirate staining including stain for iron                Independently
5.    Perform cytochemical characterization of leukemia with special stains Perform                 under
      on bone marrow aspirates                                                      supervision
6.    Perform and interpret coagulation profile including PT, APTT and Independently
      FDP
7.    Perform and interpret sickling test and osmotic fragility test                Independently
8.    Describe accurately the morphologic findings in the peripheral and Independently
      bone marrow smears, identifying and quantitating the morphologic
      abnormalities in disease states and arriving at a correct diagnosis in at
      least common cases referred to the Hematology clinic, given the
      relevant clinical data
9.    Given the clinical data, interpret the results of                             Independently
         i.   Red cell indices
        ii.   Plasma hemoglobin
       iii.   Hemosiderin in urine
       iv.    Hemolytic anemia profile including HPLC, Hb electrophoresis
              etc.
        v.    Hemoglobin and serum protein electrophoresis
       vi.    Clotting time and other point of care tests for bleeding


                                                                                             20
      vii.       G6PD enzyme estimation
      viii.      Platelet function tests including platelet aggregation and
                 adhesion and PF3 release
       ix.       Russell’s viper venom time (RVVT)
        x.       Coagulation Factor assays
       xi.       Serum Fibrinogen
      xii.       Screening for coagulation factor inhibitor, Bethesda Assay,
      xiii.      Fibrin Degradation Products (FDP), D-Dimers
      xiv.       Monitoring of anti-coagulant therapy
       xv.       Thrombophilia      profile   (Lupus    anticoagulant   (LAC),
                 Anticardiolipin Antibody (ACA), Activated Protein C
                 Resistance (APCR), Protein C (Pr C), Protein S (Pr S) and
                 Antithrombin III (AT III))
      xvi.       Serum ferritin, Serum iron and total iron binding capacity
10.   Interpret flow cytometry findings in the immunophenotyping of Independently
      leukemia, CD34 enumeration, CD 3/CD 19 enumeration, PNH work
      up, etc.
11.   Interpret results of cytogenetics and molecular diagnostics in the work Independently
      up of hematological diseases
12.   Prepare samples as appropriate for the indication, and operate Observation only
      equipment such as automated cell counter, flow cytometry,
      coagulometers, HPLC and electrophoresis apparatus
IV    LABORATORY MEDICINE
1.    Plan a strategy of laboratory investigation of a given case, given the Independently
      relevant clinical history and physical findings in a logical sequence,
      with a rational explanation of each step; be able to correctly interpret
      the laboratory data of such studies, and discuss their significance with
      a view to arrive at a diagnosis.
 2.   Perform urine analysis including physical, chemical and microscopic, Independently
      examination of the sediment as well as by Dipstick methods.
 3.   Perform macroscopic and microscopic examination of feces and Independently
      identify the ova and cysts of common parasites.




                                                                                      21
     4.        Perform a complete examination: physical, chemical and cell content Independently
               of Cerebrospinal Fluid (C.S.F), pleural and peritoneal fluid
     5.        Perform semen analysis and interpret results in the context of clinical Independently
               and hormone findings
     6.        Perform quantitative estimation of blood/serum by automated Independently
               techniques for common biochemical tests
     7.        Prepare standard solutions and reagents relevant to common Independently
               biochemical tests including the preparation of normal solution, molar
               solution and buffers
     8.        Interpret and report common laboratory biochemical tests (LFT, KFT, Independently
               endocrine function tests) with understanding of clinical implications
     9.        Operate, maintain and troubleshoot common equipment used such as Perform                under
               photoelectric colorimeter, Spectrophotometer, pH meter, Centrifuge, supervision
               Electrophoresis apparatus, ELISA Reader, PCR, chemiluminescence,
               etc.
           V   TRANSFUSION MEDICINE
1.             Perform selection and bleeding of donors, ABO and Rh grouping and Independently
               cross match, antibody screening and titer, selection of blood for
               exchange transfusion
          2.   Resolve ABO grouping problems and outline measures for Independently
               investigation of transfusion medicine
          3.   Perform and interpret anti-globulin test in antenatal and neonatal work Independently
               up
          4.   Prepare blood components such as cryoprecipitates, platelet Observation only
               concentrates, fresh frozen plasma, single donor plasma, red blood cell
               concentrates, etc. and test blood for presence of pathogens including
               HBV, HCV, HIV, VDRL, Malaria, etc.
VI             AUTOPSY
      1.       Perform an autopsy, dissect various organ complexes, and display the Independently       (see
               gross findings (Note: An improvised autopsy may also be arranged in Note)
               places where full autopsy is not possible. Relevant organs from wet
               specimens in the museum with appropriate clinical history may be
               arranged for a detailed description and diagnosis. At least ten such


                                                                                               22
           improvised autopsies may be discussed by each candidate during the
           entire duration of the course)
2.         Provide Provisional and Final Anatomic Diagnosis report, major Independently
           findings correctly and systematically at autopsy, and the Autopsy
           Protocol as per prescribed instructions.
     VII   MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
1.         Interpret results of Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), real time PCR, Independently
           Sanger Sequencing in a given clinical context.
2.         Interpret results of in-situ hybridization (fluorescent and chromogenic) Independently
           in a given clinical context
3.         Prepare sample by appropriate methods and perform Polymerase Chain Observation only
           Reaction (PCR), real time PCR, Sanger Sequencing, and in-situ
           hybridization including troubleshooting
VIII       IMMUNOPATHOLOGY
1.         Interpret direct/ indirect immunofluorescence results in the context of Independently
           common diseases of the skin, medical renal diseases and autoimmune
           diseases
2.         Prepare sample by appropriate methods and perform indirect Perform                       under
           immunofluorescence on a frozen section from skin/ renal biopsy          supervision
     IX    ELECTRON MICROSCOPY
1.         Interpret transmission electron microscopy results in common non- Independently
           neoplastic and neoplastic diseases
2.         Prepare specimen by appropriate methods and process tissue for Observation only
           electron microscopy, interpret semi-thin sections and view ultra-thin
           sections under electron microscope
     X.    DIGITAL PATHOLOGY
     1.    Navigate and annotate whole slide scanned images                        Independently
     2.    Select and scan slides for digitalization and perform basic image Observation only
           analysis functions such as length measurements, enumeration, etc.
XI.        TEACHING
1.         Demonstrate different methods of teaching-learning and assessments      Independently
2.         Engage and teach undergraduates and paramedical staff in the form of Independently
           small group teaching and demonstrations

                                                                                            23
3.        Engage in peer teaching in the form of presenting seminars and journal Independently
          clubs and be able to use different modes of teaching including
          PowerPoint projections and charts
XII.      RESEARCH
1.        Write the thesis (and/or a scientific paper) in accordance with the Independently
          prescribed instructions, as expected of international standards


                     TEACHING AND LEARNING METHODS
 General principles
 Acquisition of competencies being the keystone of doctoral medical education, such training
 should be skills oriented. Learning in the program, essentially autonomous and self-directed,
 and emanating from academic and clinical work, shall also include assisted learning. The
 formal sessions are meant to supplement this core effort.


 All students joining the postgraduate (PG) courses shall work as full-time (junior)
 residents/demonstrators during the period of training, attending not less than 80% of the
 training activity during the calendar year, and participating in all assignments and facets of the
 educational process. They shall maintain a logbook for recording the training they have
 undergone, and details of the procedures done during laboratory and clinical postings in real
 time. Maintenance of e-records of such procedures is encouraged.


 The three-year training programme for the MD degree may be arranged in the form of postings
 to different assignments/laboratories for specified periods as outlined below. The period of
 such assignments/postings is recommended for 36 months with breaks only for examinations
 and mandatory postings. Posting schedules may be modified depending on needs, feasibility
 and exigencies. For facilities not available in the parent institution as well as for additional
 knowledge and skill, extramural postings may be undertaken. Departments may vary the
 postings slightly based on the clinical profile of the hospital, within the time period bands given
 below, however at least the lower limit for each of the four main components of the course
 must be covered during postings.


 Posting schedule is given below:



                                                                                                 24
S. No Section/ Subject                                                     Duration in months
(i)         Surgical Pathology, Autopsy, Immunohistochemistry                     11-16
(ii)        Hematology, Laboratory Medicine, and Blood bank                       8-10
(iii)       Cytopathology                                                          6-9
(iv)        Basic Sciences, Immunopathology, Cytogenetics, Electron                2-6
            microscopy, Molecular Biology etc. and
            Research Techniques including Thesis
            Total                                                          36 (including exam)

Teaching-Learning methods

This should include a judicious mix of demonstrations, symposia, journal clubs, clinical
meetings, seminars, small group discussion, case-based learning, simulation-based teaching,
self-directed learning, integrated learning, interdepartmental meetings, and any other
collaborative activity with the allied departments. Methods with exposure to the applied aspects
of the subject relevant to basic/clinical sciences should also be used. The suggested examples
of teaching-learning methods are given below but are not limited to these. The frequency
of various below mentioned teaching-learning methods can vary based on the subject’s
requirements, competencies, workload and overall working schedule in the concerned
subject. The Pathology resident is expected to sit in reporting every day, having seen the
slides the previous day with written descriptions, which should be evaluated daily by the
reporting faculty. This is the mainstay of training in all disciplines of Pathology.


A. Lectures: Didactic lectures should be used sparingly. A minimum of 10 lectures per year in
the concerned PG department is suggested. Topics to be selected as per subject requirements
All postgraduate trainees will be required to attend these lectures. Lectures can cover topics
such as:
        1. Subject related important topics as per specialty requirement
        2. Recent advances
        3. Research methodology and biostatistics
        4. Salient features of Undergraduate/Postgraduate medical curriculum
        5. Teaching and assessment methodology.
Topic numbers 3, 4, 5 can be done during research methodology/biostatistics and medical
education workshops in the institute.


                                                                                                 25
B. Journal club: Minimum of once in 1-2 weeks is suggested.
Topics will include presentation and critical appraisal of original research papers published in
peer reviewed indexed journals. The presenter(s) shall be assessed by faculty and grades
recorded in the logbook.


C. Student Seminar: Minimum of once every 1-2 weeks is suggested.
Important topics should be selected as per subject requirements and allotted for in-depth study
by a postgraduate student. A teacher should be allocated for each seminar as faculty moderator
to help the student prepare the topic well. It should aim at comprehensive evidence-based
review of the topic. The student should be graded by the faculty and peers.


D. Student Symposium: Minimum of once every 3 months.
A broad topic of significance should be selected, and each part shall be dealt by one
postgraduate student. A teacher moderator should be allocated for each symposium and
moderator should track the growth of students. The symposium should aim at an evidence-
based exhaustive review of the topic. All participating postgraduates should be graded by the
faculty and peers.


E. Laboratory work/ Interactive slide and gross sessions: Minimum - once every 1-2 weeks.
Laboratory work, slide and gross specimen teaching sessions should be coordinated and guided
by faculty from the department. Various methods like case-based discussions, oral or written
quiz, etc. are to be used. Faculty from the department should participate in moderating the
teaching-learning sessions.


F. Interdepartmental colloquium
Faculty and students must attend monthly meetings between the main Department and other
department/s on topics of current/common interest or clinical cases. This includes institutional
activities such as clinical combined rounds (CCR), clinic-pathological correlation conferences
(CPC), and departmental activities like autopsy conferences.


G. a. Rotational clinical / community / institutional postings
Depending on local institutional policy and the subject specialty needs, postgraduate trainees
may be posted in relevant departments/ units/ institutions. The aim would be to acquire more
in-depth knowledge as applicable to the concerned specialty. Postings would be rotated
                                                                                             26
between various units/departments and details to be included in the specialty-based Guidelines.
Few examples are listed below:


 ●     Laboratory-based specialty units/departments e.g. Biochemistry / Microbiology/
       Infection control unit/Laboratory Medicine, Hematology, Blood bank, Transplantation
       Immunology, Forensic Medicine, Proteomics, etc.
 ●     Medical Education Unit (MEU) or Department of Medical Education (DOME):
       optional
 G. b. Posting under “District Residency Programme” (DRP):
 All postgraduate students pursuing MS/MS in broad specialties in all Medical
 Colleges/Institutions shall undergo a compulsory rotation of three months in District
 Hospitals/District Health System as a part of the course curriculum, as per the Postgraduate
 Medical Education (Amendment) Regulations (2020). Such rotation shall take place in the 3 rd
 or 4th, or 5th semester of the Postgraduate programme and the rotation shall be termed as
 “District Residency Programme” and the PG medical student undergoing training shall be
 termed as “District Resident”.


 Every posting should have its defined learning objectives. It is recommended that the
 departments draw up objectives and guidelines for every posting offered in conjunction with
 the collaborating department/s or unit/s. This will ensure that students acquire expected
 competencies and are not considered as an additional helping hand for the department / unit
 in which they are posted. The PG student must be tagged along with those of other relevant
 departments for bedside case discussion/basic science exercises as needed, under the
 guidance of an assigned faculty.


 Opportunities to present and discuss infectious disease cases through bedside discussion
 and ward/grand rounds with specialists / clinicians in different hospital settings must
 be scheduled to address antimicrobial resistance issues and strategies to deal with it.


 H. Teaching research skills
 Writing a thesis should be used for inculcating research knowledge and skills. All
 postgraduate students shall conduct a research project of sufficient depth to be presented to
 the University as a postgraduate thesis under the supervision of an eligible faculty member


                                                                                            27
of the department as guide and one or more co-guides who may be from the same or other
departments.


In addition to the thesis project, every postgraduate trainee shall participate in at least one
additional research project that may be started or already ongoing in the department. It is
preferable that this project will be in an area different from the thesis work. For instance, if a
clinical research project is taken up as thesis work, the additional project may deal with
community/field/laboratory work. Diversity of knowledge and skills can thereby be
reinforced.


I. Training in teaching skills
MEU/DOME should train PG students in education methodologies and assessment
techniques. The PG students shall conduct UG classes in various courses and a faculty shall
observe and provide feedback on the teaching skills of the student.


J. Logbook
During the training period, the postgraduate student should maintain a Logbook indicating
the duration of the postings/work done in Wards, OPDs, Casualty and other areas of
posting. This should indicate the procedures assisted and performed and the teaching
sessions attended. The logbook entries must be done in real time. The logbook is thus a
record of various activities by the student like: (1) Overall participation & performance, (2)
attendance, (3) participation in sessions, (4) record of completion of pre-determined
activities, and (5) acquisition of selected competencies.

The purpose of the Logbook is to:

       a)      help maintain a record of the work done during training,
       b)      enable Faculty/Consultants to have direct information about the work done and
               intervene, if necessary,
       c)      provide feedback and assess the progress of learning with experience gained
               periodically.
The Logbook should be used in the internal assessment of the student, should be checked and
assessed periodically by the faculty members imparting the training. The PG students will be
required to produce completed logbook in original at the time of final practical examination.
It should be signed by the Head of the Department. A proficiency certificate from the Head

                                                                                               28
 of Department regarding the clinical competence and skillful performance of procedures by
 the student will be submitted by the PG student at the time of the examination.


 The PG students shall be trained to reflect and record their reflections in logbook particularly
 of the critical incidents. Components of good teaching practices must be assessed in all
 academic activity conducted by the PG student and at least two sessions dedicated for
 assessment of teaching skills must be conducted every year of the PG program. The teaching
 faculty are referred to the MCI Logbook Guidelines uploaded on the Website.


 K. Course in Research Methodology
 All postgraduate students shall complete an online course in Research Methodology within
 six months of the commencement of the batch and generate the online certificate on successful
 completion of the course.


Other aspects
 ● The Postgraduate trainees must participate in the teaching and training program of
     undergraduate students and interns attending the department.
 ● Trainees shall attend accredited scientific meetings (CME, symposia, and conferences)
     at least once a year.
 ● Department shall encourage e-learning activities.
 ● The Postgraduate trainees should undergo training in Basic Cardiac Life Support (BCLS)
     and Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS).
 ● The Postgraduate trainees must undergo training in information technology and use of
     computers.


During the training program, patient safety is of paramount importance; therefore,
relevant clinical skills are to be learnt initially on the models, later to be performed under
supervision followed by independent performance. For this purpose, provision of skills
laboratories in medical colleges is mandatory.


                                ASSESSMENT

FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT, i.e., assessment to improve learning



                                                                                              29
Formative assessment should be continual and should assess medical knowledge, patient
care, procedural & academic skills, interpersonal skills, professionalism, self-directed
learning and ability to practice in the system.

General Principles
Internal Assessment should be frequent, cover all domains of learning and used to provide
feedback to improve learning; it should also cover professionalism and communication skills.
The Internal Assessment should be conducted in theory and practical/clinical examination,
should be frequent, cover all domains of learning and used to provide feedback to improve
learning; it should also cover professionalism and communication skills.


Quarterly assessment during the MD training should be based on:
   ● Case presentation, case work up,
       case handling/management                     : once a week
   ● Laboratory performance                         : twice a week
   ● Journal club                                   : once a week
   ● Seminar                                        : once a fortnight
   ● Case discussions                               : once a fortnight/month
   ● Interdepartmental case or seminar              : once a month
 Note: These sessions may be organized and recorded as an institutional activity for
         all postgraduates.
   ● Attendance at Scientific meetings, CME programmes (at least 02 each)


The student to be assessed periodically as per categories listed in appropriate (non-
clinical/clinical) postgraduate student appraisal form (Annexure I).


SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT, i.e., assessment at the end of training

Essential pre-requisites for appearing for examination include:

1. Logbook of work done during the training period including rotation postings,
   departmental presentations, and internal assessment reports should be submitted.




                                                                                          30
2. At least two presentations at state/national level conference. One paper (thesis or
   non-thesis related work) should be published /accepted/publication draft in an
   indexed journal.

The summative examination would be carried out as per the Rules given in the latest
POSTGRADUATE           MEDICAL EDUCATION                REGULATIONS. The theory
examination shall be held in advance before the Clinical and Practical examination, so
that the answer books can be assessed and evaluated before the commencement of the
clinical/Practical and Oral examination.


The postgraduate examination shall be in three parts:
1. Thesis
   Thesis shall be submitted at least six months before the Theory and Clinical / Practical
   examination. The thesis shall be examined by a minimum of three examiners; one internal
   and two external examiners, who shall not be the examiners for Theory and Clinical
   examination. A post graduate student in broad specialty shall be allowed to appear for the
   Theory and Practical/Clinical examination only after the acceptance of the Thesis by the
   examiners.
2. Theory examination
   The examinations shall be organized based on ‘Grading ‘or ‘Marking system’ to evaluate
   and to certify post graduate student's level of knowledge, skill, and competence at the end
   of the training, as given in the latest POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION
   REGULATIONS. Obtaining a minimum of 50% marks in ‘Theory’ as well as ‘Practical’
   separately shall be mandatory for passing examination. The examination for M.D./ M.S
   shall be held at the end of 3rd academic year.

   There shall be four theory papers (as per PG Regulations).

   Paper I: Basic sciences as applied to the subject (general pathology,
                pathophysiology, immunopathology, and molecular biology).
   Paper II: (Systemic pathology – surgical and cytopathology).
   Paper III: (Hematology, transfusion medicine and laboratory medicine including
                instrumentation and quality control).
   Paper IV: Recent advances in the subject.



                                                                                           31
  The papers should have ideally one (01) structured long answer question which will
  evaluate comprehensive in-depth knowledge and 6-8 short answer questions.


3. Practical/clinical and Oral/viva voce examination
   Practical examination
   Practical examination should be spread at least over two days for each student and include
   various major components of the syllabus focusing mainly on the psychomotor domain.

   Oral/Viva voce examination on defined areas should be conducted by each examiner
   separately. Oral examination shall be comprehensive enough to test the post graduate
   student’s overall knowledge of the subject focusing on psychomotor and affective domain.


   The final clinical examination in broad specialty clinical subjects should include:


   •   Cases pertaining to major systems (e.g., one long case and three short cases),
   •   Stations for laboratory, procedural and communication skills,
   •   Logbook Records and reports of day-to-day observation during the training,
   •   It is emphasized that Oral/viva voce examination shall be comprehensive enough to
       test the post graduate student’s overall knowledge of the subject.

The practical examination in Pathology should follow general guidelines outlined below which
may be modified according to local university guidelines and should be spread over at least
two days. The following marks distribution is suggested:

Practical 500 marks (including 100 marks for internal assessment)

Section I: Histopathology: 150 marks
   ● Slides (12-15)
   ● Grossing/autopsy
   ● Long case (write a full description with clinical information provided) and/or 2 biopsy
       cases with ancillary tests reporting (written work only, no viva)
Section II: Cytopathology and histo/cyto techniques: 80 marks
   ● Slides (5-8)
   ● Histo/Cyto techniques
   ● Special stain exercise


                                                                                          32
   ● Immunopathology, OSPE, EM
Section III: Hematology, transfusion medicine and clinical pathology: 120 marks
   ● Slides
   ● Exercises
   ● Case study
   ● Blood bank
   ● Clinical pathology exercises and OSPE
Section IV: Viva, basic sciences, and communication skills: 50 marks
   ● Pedagogy/thesis presentation
   ● Oral viva
   ● Basic Sciences
Details of exercises in individual sections are given below:

I. Clinical Pathology:

   ● Discussion of a clinical case history.
   ● Plan relevant investigations of the above case and interpret the biochemistry findings.
   ● Two investigations should be performed including at least one clinical pathology
       exercise like CSF, pleural tap etc. analysis and complete urinalysis.

II. Haematology:

   ● Discuss hematology cases given the relevant history. Plan relevant investigations.

   ● Perform complete hemogram and at least two tests preferably including one coagulation
     exercise.

   ● Identify electrophoresis strips, osmotic fragility charts etc., interpretation of data from
     auto analyzers, HPLC and flow cytometry.

   ● Examine, report, and discuss around ten cases given the history and relevant blood
     smears and/or bone marrow aspirate smears and bone marrow biopsy interpretation.

III. Transfusion Medicine:

   ● Perform blood grouping

   ● Perform the necessary exercise like cross matching.

   ● Coomb’s test, gel cards interpretation.




                                                                                             33
IV. Histopathology and cytopathology:

   ● Examine, report, and discuss 12-15 cases histopathology and 5-8 cytopathology cases,
     given the relevant history and slides.

   ● Perform a Hematoxylin and Eosin stain and any special stain on a paraffin section.
     Should be conversant with histopathology techniques including cryostat.

   ● Long case (write a full description with clinical information provided) and/or 2 biopsy
     cases with ancillary tests reporting

V. Autopsy:

   ● Given a case history and relevant organs (with or without slides), give a list of
     anatomical diagnosis in an autopsy case.

VI. Gross Pathology

   ● Describe findings of gross specimens, give diagnosis, and identify the sections to be
     processed. The post graduate student should perform grossing in front of the examiners
     for evaluation.

VII. Basic Sciences:

   ● 10-15 spots based on basic sciences be included

   ● Identify electron micrographs

   ● Identify gels, results of PCR, immunological tests including             interpretation
     of Immunofluorescence pictures, etc.

   ● Identify histochemical and immuno-histochemistry stains

VIII. Teaching exercise

   ● Teach on a small topic for about 10 min or present dissertation and research

   ● General Viva-Voce (Grand Viva) – structured viva may be done separately or combined
     with above exercises

Recommended Reading:
Books (latest edition)
 1. Histology for Pathologists. Stephen S. Sternberg (Ed), Raven Press, New York.
 2. Robbin’s Pathologic Basis of Disease Ramzi S.Cotran, Vinay Kumar, Stanley L
     Robbins WB Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
 3. Ackerman’s Surgical Pathology. Juan Rosai Mosby. St. Louis.
 4. Diagnostic Surgical Pathology. Stephen S Sternberg. Lippincott, William
     Wilkins. Philadelphia.

                                                                                         34
 5. Diagnostic Histopathology of Tumours. Christopher DM Fletcher (Ed). Churchill
      Livingstone. Edinburgh.
 6. Manual & Atlas of Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology. Svante R Orell, et al
      London.
 7. Theory and Practice of Histological Techniques, Bancroft JD, Stevens A, Turner DR,
      Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
 8. Diagnostic Cytology and its Histopathologic Basis, Koss LG, J.B. Lippincott,
      Philadelphia.
 9. Comprehensive Cytopathology, Bibbo M, W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
 10. Wintrobe’s Clinical Hematology, Lee GR, Foerster J, Lupeus J, Paraskevas F,
      Gveer JP, Rodgers GN, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.
 11. Atlas and Text of Hematology 4th edition. Singh T. Avichal Publishing Company.
 12. Dacie and Lewis Practical Hematology, Bain BJ, Bates I, Laffan MA. Elsevier.
 13. Bone Marrow Pathology, Bain BJ, Clark DM, Lampert IA, Blackwell Science,
      Oxford.
 14. Henry’s clinical diagnosis and management by laboratory methods.
 15. WHO classification of tumors. IARC Lyon.
Journals

03-05 international Journals and 02 national (all indexed) journals.




                                                                                         35
                                                                                          Annexure I

      Student appraisal form for broad specialty non-clinical
                           disciplines
                                 Less than                                More than
                                                    Satisfactory                          Comments
       Elements                 Satisfactory                             satisfactory
                               1      2     3   4        5         6   7      8       9
       Scholastic aptitude
 1     and learning

       Has knowledge
       appropriate for level
1.1    of training
       Participation and
       contribution to
1.2    learning activity
       (e.g., Journal Club,
       Seminars, CME etc)
       Conduct of research
       and other scholarly
1.3    activity assigned
       (e.g Posters,
       publications etc)
       Documentation of
1.4    acquisition of
       competence
       (eg Log book)
       Performance in work
1.5
       based assessments
       Self-directed
1.6    Learning


       Work related to
 2     training
       Practical skills that
2.1    are appropriate for
       the level of training
       Respect for
       processes and
2.2    procedures in the
       work space
       Ability to work with
2.3    other members of the
       team
       Participation and
       compliance with the
       quality improvement
2.4    process at the work
       environment



                                                                                                 36
      Ability to record and
      document work
      accurately and
2.5   appropriate for level
      of training


      Professional
 3    attributes
      Responsibility and
3.1   accountability
      Contribution to
      growth of learning of
3.2   the team
      Conduct that is
      ethically appropriate
      and respectful at all
3.3   times



      Space for additional
 4    comments




 5
      Disposition


      Has this assessment
                              Ye
      pattern been
      discussed with the      s    No
      trainee?

      If not explain.



      Name and Signature
      of the assesse

      Name and Signature
      of the assessor
      Date




                                        37
Subject Expert Group members for preparation of REVISED Guidelines for
competency based postgraduate training programme for MD in Pathology

    1. Dr. Venkateswaran K Iyer, Convener, Expert group
       Professor & Head
       Dept. of Pathology,
       AIIMS, New Delhi

    2. Dr. Nita Khurana,
       Director Professor and Head,
       Dept. of Pathology, MAMC, New Delhi.

    3. Dr. Devdatta Basu,
       Prof and Head, Dept. of Pathology,
       JIPMER, Puducherry.

    4.. Dr. S Shankar,
        Professor and Head, Dept. of Pathology,
        Govt. Medical College, Kottayam

    5. Dr. B.S. Dayananda
       Professor and Head, Dept. of Pathology
       Bangalore Medical College & Research Institute
       Bangalore.

    6. Dr. Pradeep Vaitheeswar
       Additional Professor
       Department of Pathology
       Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital,
       Parel, Mumbai.

    7. Dr. Uttara Chatterjee,
       Professor, Dept. of Pathology,
       Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education & Research (IPGME&R),
       Kolkata.




                                                                            38
