        [To be published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-III, Section-4]
                  NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION
              POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION BOARD
                       Pocket 14, Sector 8, Dwarka,
                         NEW DELHI – 110 077



POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION REGULATIONS - 2023

File No.N-P016(11)/2/2023-PGMEB-NMC - In exercise of overall powers conferred by the
National Medical Commission Act, 2019 vis-à-vis medical education in general and specifically
by sub-section (1) of Section 25 and sub-section (2) of Section 57 of the said Act, National
Medical Commission makes the following Regulations namely –

Short title – These Regulations may be called the “Post-graduate Medical Education
Regulations-2023” or “PGMER-23” in its abbreviated form.

Commencement – These Regulations shall come into force from the date of their publication
in the official gazette.



                                           CHAPTER I
                                        PRELIMINARY


1.1     FOCUS AND GOAL

        The focus and goal of post-graduate medical education shall be to produce competent
        specialist and /or Medical teacher recognized by the fraternity as the graduating scholar,
        building upon his undergraduate education, skills who shall –

 i.     Recognize the health needs of the community and carry out professional obligations
        ethically keeping in view the objectives of the national health policy;

 ii.    have mastered most of the competencies, pertaining to the respective Speciality, that is
        required to be practised at the secondary and the tertiary levels of the health care delivery
        system;

 iii.   be aware of the contemporary advances and developments in the respective discipline
        concerned and shall progress accordingly;

 iv.    have acquired a spirit of scientific inquiry and is oriented to the principles of research
        methodology and epidemiology;

 v.     have acquired the basic skills in the teaching of medical and paramedical professionals;

 vi.    acquire basic management skills in human resources, materials and resource
        management related to health care delivery, general hospital management, principal



                                                                                                 1
      inventory skills and counselling;

 vii. Develop personal characteristics and attitudes required for professional life such as
      personal integrity, sense of responsibility and dependability and ability to relate to or
      show concern for other individuals;

 viii. become an exemplary citizen by observing the highest standards of professional ethics
       and working towards fulfilling social and professional obligations to respond to national
       aspirations.

      The institutions imparting post-graduate medical education shall continually work to
      synchronize the institutional goals with the national goals to produce the kind of trained
      manpower with high knowledge, appropriate skills and impeccable ethical standards
      required.


1.2   DEFINITIONS – In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires the terms
      defined herein shall bear the meaning assigned to them below and their cognate
      expressions and variations shall be construed accordingly –
      a. “Act” shall mean National Medical Commission Act, 2019 [Act No. 30 of 2019].
      b. “Commission” shall mean the National Medical Commission duly established
         under Section 3 of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019.

      c. “Medical Institution” shall mean ‘Medical Institution’ as defined in Section 2(i) of
         the National Medical Commission Act, 2019; and shall include a common
         expression medical college as well.

      d. “MSR” shall mean the Minimum Standards of Requirements for Post-graduate
         courses in medical institution as notified by the Post-graduate Medical Education
         Board (PGMEB) from time to time, which shall also include, explanatory notes,
         circulars, advisories etc.

      e. “NEET-PG” shall mean ‘National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission in
         Broad Speciality’ courses.

      f. “NEET-SS” shall mean ‘National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for Super
         Speciality’ courses as referred to under Section 14 of the National Medical
         Commission Act, 2019.

      g. “NExT” shall mean the common final year examination or National Exit Test as
         referred to under Section 15 of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019.

      h. “University” shall mean the Health University as defined under Sub-Section (f) of
         Section 2 or a University as defined under sub-section (x) of Section 2; both under
         the National Medical Commission Act, 2019, as the case may be.

      i. “Feeder Speciality” shall mean broad specialty qualification required to pursue
         super-speciality course of qualification.




                                                                                            2
                                            CHAPTER II
        COURSES OF SPECIALITIES AND COMPONENTS OF POST-GRADUATE
                                 TRAINING


2.1       LIST OF QUALIFICATIONS, DURATION OF                         THE     COURSE AND
          COMPONENTS OF POST-GRADUATE TRAINING
            Sl.                    Name of Qualification                   Duration       of
                                                                           Course (including
            No.
                                                                           period         of
                                                                           examination)
            i.     Post-graduate    Broad     Speciality    Qualifications 3 Years/ 2 years*
                   (Annexure-1)
            ii.    Post-graduate Super Speciality Courses (Annexure-2)     3 Years
            iii.   Post-graduate Diploma Courses (Annexure-3) @            2 Years
            iv.    Post-Doctoral Certificate Courses (PDCC) (Annexure-4) 1 year
            v.     Post-Doctoral Fellowship (PDF) Courses (Annexure-5)     2 years
            vi.    DM/M.Ch (6 years Course) (Annexure-6)                   6 years
       * The period of training, including the period of examination, shall be two years for the
         students, who possess a recognised two-year post-graduate diploma course in the same
         subject.
       @ Medical colleges/institutes may apply to Medical Assessment and Rating Board
         (MARB) for converting diploma seats to degree seats. No more new applications will
         be entertained for permission to start or increase in number of diploma seats.


2.2       COMPONENTS OF THE POST-GRADUATE CURRICULUM
          The major components of the post-graduate curriculum shall be:
       i. Theoretical knowledge
       ii. Practical and clinical skills
       iii. Writing thesis
       iv. Soft skill attributes including communication skills.
       v. Training in research methodology, medical ethics and medico legal aspects.



                                            CHAPTER III
       ESTABLISHMENT OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS AND
           STARTING OF NEW POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL COURSES


3.1       PERMISSION
  i.      Permission to start the post-graduate course along with an undergraduate medical course


                                                                                            3
       in a medical college/institute or permission to start a post-graduate course in already
       established undergraduate medical college/institution and determination of number of
       seats to be permitted shall be as per the Establishment of New Medical Institutions,
       Starting of New Medical Courses, Increase of Seats for Existing Courses & Assessment
       and Rating Regulations in vogue, Post-Graduate Medical Education Regulations
       (PGMER) in vogue, Teachers Eligibility Qualifications in Medical Institutions
       Regulations in vogue, MSR in vogue, Curriculum requirements of respective speciality
       as notified/informed from time to time on website or by other methods by Post-Graduate
       Medical Education Board (PGMEB), other relevant regulations, explanatory notes,
       circulars and advisories etc., issued from time to time.

       Post-graduate courses will be permitted only if the medical college/institution fulfills all
       the requirements for running the undergraduate medical college

 ii.   Existing or proposed non-teaching hospitals owned and managed by government can
       start post-graduate courses without having undergraduate college, if they fulfil the norms
       and procedures prescribed in the Establishment of New Medical Institutions, Starting of
       New Medical Courses, Increase of Seats for Existing Courses & Assessment and Rating
       Regulations in vogue, Post-Graduate Medical Education Regulations (PGMER) in
       vogue, Teachers Eligibility Qualifications in Medical Institutions Regulations in vogue,
       MSR in vogue, Curriculum requirements of respective speciality as notified/informed
       from time to time on website or by other methods by Post-Graduate Medical Education
       Board (PGMEB), other relevant regulations, explanatory notes, circulars and advisories
       etc., issued from time to time.

       MARB shall do the assessment as per the guidelines and Assessment Form prescribed
       by the PGMEB. MARB shall evaluate the Assessment Report and put up before the
       Committee comprising of following members:
        President of MARB                                                   -       Chairman
        Member of MARB/Expert (to be nominated by President                 -       Member
        of MARB )
        President/ Member of UGMEB (to be nominated by                      -       Member
        President of UGMEB)
        President/ Member of PGMEB (to be nominated by                      -       Member
        President of PGMEB)
        Director/Deputy Secretary of MARB will be Member Secretary

       The Committee will deliberate on the application, with relevant reports regarding
       whether the medical institution fulfils the prescribed conditions mentioned in above
       mentioned documents and take one of the following decision(s) –
       a. Whether to permit to start the post-graduate course/speciality or not;
       b. the number of seats to be permitted in the Department from the next Academic Year

       Once permitted, seats will be called recognised seats for the purpose of registration of
       degree awarded by University.


3.2    ACCREDITATION


                                                                                               4
      Every permitted post-graduate medical course will have to be accredited by PGMEB as
      below:
      The medical college/institute which has started a new postgraduate course of a
      qualification shall apply for accreditation of the post-graduate medical course to the
      President, Postgraduate Medical Education Board (PGMEB) at least three months prior
      to the expected date of examination to be conducted by the affiliating university in which
      the first admitted batch is due to appear. Letter from the medical college/institution
      informing about the exact date of the Practical Examination should reach PGMEB at
      least fifteen days prior to the date of the Practical Examination. PGMEB will do the
      assessment of medical college/medical institution running the post-graduate courses.
      The Assessment Report shall be put before a Committee, comprising the following
      members:
       President of PGMEB                                                   -      Chairman
       Member of PGMEB/Expert (to be nominated by President of              -      Member
       PGMEB)
       President/ Member of UGMEB (to be nominated by President             -      Member
       of UGMEB)
       President/Member of MARB (to be nominated by President               -      Member
       of MARB)
       Director/Deputy Secretary of PGMEB will be Member Secretary


      If any deficiency is found, then the Committee will ask the medical college/institution
      for Compliance. The Committee will examine the Assessment/Assessment and
      Compliance Report regarding whether the medical institution fulfils the prescribed
      conditions and Report on Assessment of the Examination. Decision(s) will be taken by
      the Committee on the following:
      c. Whether to accredit the post-graduate course/speciality in the medical
         college/institution or not;
      d. number of seats to be permitted in the Department from the next Academic Year

      If the medical college/institute is denied accreditation, then there will be no admission
      from the next academic year; and the medical college/institute will apply afresh for
      permission to restart the course.

      Failure to seek timely accreditation of the existing post-graduate course shall invite
      exemplary penalty as per the Sanctions and Penalty Clause mentioned in Chapter-IX of
      this regulation.


3.3   INCREASE OF SEATS
      Procedures, methods and criteria for increase of seats will be same as prescribed in sub
      Section 3.1 (Permission)
      Increase of seats so granted in already accredited post-graduate course shall be deemed
      to be recognised post-graduate seats for the purpose of registration of the students. If
      the Speciality is already accredited, then the medical college/institute shall not apply for
      accreditation again.



                                                                                              5
3.4   MONITORING OF STANDARDS OF MEDICAL EDUCATION
      The standards of the Medical Education shall be monitored as per the Maintenance of
      Standards of Medical Education Regulations, 2023 in vogue. Medical college/institute
      shall pay Annual Fee, as notified by the National Medical Commission from time to
      time, for the purpose of annual evaluation. Every medical college/institute will pay
      Affiliation Fee for every course as per the amount fixed in the guidelines from time to
      time.

3.5   MINIMUM STANDARDS OF REQUIREMENTS (MSR)
      Medical colleges/institutes shall follow the guidelines prescribed by the Post-graduate
      Medical Education Board in the Minimum Standards of Requirements (MSR) document
      for post-graduate medical education. PGMEB shall notify the Minimum Standards of
      Requirements (MSR) from time to time for physical infrastructure of the hospital and
      medical college/institute, teaching staff and other staff, clinical material (prescribed
      number of patients as per curriculum requirement, laboratory and radiological
      investigations) for all-round training of the post-graduate students. The PGMEB shall
      also notify the modifications or amendments in the MSR from time to time which shall
      have to be mandatorily followed by the medical colleges/institutes.


                                      CHAPTER IV
                         ADMISSION, COUNSELLING, ETC.


4.1   ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA - Eligibility to pursue a ‘Broad specialty post-graduate
      programme in Medicine’ will be on the basis of computation of the Marks obtained in
      the common final year undergraduate examination to be known as the ‘National Exit
      Test’, conducted by the National Medical Commission or caused to have been conducted
      by National Medical Commission. Till the first batch based on National Exit Test
      (NExT) becomes eligible for admission in Broad Speciality, the existing system of
      admission through National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test-Post-graduate (NEET-PG) as
      per Post-Graduate Medical Education Regulation, 2000 (PGMER-2000) shall continue.

      Provided further that eligibility to pursue super specialty programme/course in Medicine
      shall be by securing the minimum eligible score at the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance
      Test-Super Speciality (NEET-SS) Exam conducted either by the National Medical
      Commission or caused to have been conducted by National Medical Commission. List
      of feeder broad specialty qualification required by a person to pursue Super-Speciality
      course of recognized qualification is as per Annexure

4.2   CONDUCT OF NEET-SS – Either the National Medical Commission may conduct the
      NEET-SS for all super specialty courses or may designate any such agency or authority
      by whatever name called, to cause the NEET-SS to be conducted.

      Provided National Medical Commission may designate multiple agencies or authorities
      or a combination of agencies or authorities, to conduct NEET-SS if such designation
      suits the purpose.



                                                                                          6
       Without prejudice to anything stated above the Post Graduate Medical Education Board
       shall determine the manner, and modalities etc., of conducting the NEET-SS for Super
       Speciality courses by way of Notification.

4.3    COMMON COUNSELLING – Without prejudice to anything stated in the present
       Regulations or other NMC Regulations, there shall be common counselling for
       admission to Post-graduate courses in medicine for all medical institutions in India
       solely based on the merit list of respective exams.

       Provided the common counselling may have multiple rounds as may be necessary.

       PGMEB of NMC shall publish guidelines for the conduct of common counselling and
       the designated authority under Section 4.4 shall conduct common counselling in
       conformity with such published guidelines.

        Admission Schedule for Post-graduate Broad Specialty Courses (MD/MS)
Sl.                                             Central Counselling       State Counselling to be
No.         Schedule for Admission                                        conducted            by
                                           All India Quota/ Deemed/
                                                                          respective Counselling
                                           Central          Universities/
                                                                          authorities*
                                           Institutes/ AFMS
1.    Conduct of exam                       As per NExT Regulation or in case admission is to be
                                            based on NEET-PG, then Exam will be conducted in the
                                            month of March
2.    Declaration of result                As per NExT Regulation or in case admission is to be
                                           based on NEET-PG, then Exam will be declared by first
                                           week of April
3.    First round of counselling            10th to 20th May                     20th to 31st May
4.    Last date of joining                 31st May                              5th June

5.    Second round of counselling           1st June to 10th June                11th to 20th June

6.    Last date of joining                 20th June                             30th June

7.    Mop up/Third Round                   1st July, - 10th July                 10th July to 20th July

8.    Last date of joining                  20th July,                           31st July

9.    Online stray vacancy round for All 21st July - 31st July                   1st – 5th August
      India Quota/Central and Deemed
      Universities
10.   Last Date of Joining                                          10th August
11.   Commencement of academic session                                1st July

Note: 1. For the purpose of ensuring the above time-schedule, Saturday, Sunday or Holidays
         (except National Holiday) shall be treated as working days.
       2. Keeping in view the circumstances and exigencies, Post-Graduate Medical
          Education Board may alter the number of rounds and schedule of counselling




                                                                                                     7
The following Matrix shall be applicable with regard to permissibility to students to
exercise fresh choice during counselling:-
          Round            Free     Exit with            Ineligibility for         Amount of
                           Exit forfeiture of Fees     further counselling      Registration Fee
 AIQ I/ Deemed                                                                 Government –
                                                                               Rs.25,000 (half for
 AIQ II/ Deemed                                                                SC/ST/OBC)
 AIQ-III/Mop Up                   If not joined              If joined         Deemed –
                                                                               Rs.2,00,000
 State Quota I                                                                 Government –
                                                                               Rs.25,000 (half for
 State Quota II
                                                                               SC/ST/OBC)
 State Quota-III/Mop              If not joined              If joined         Private –
 Up                                                                            Rs.2,00,000

Time Schedule for completion of Admission process for PG (Super Specialty) Medical
Courses:

Sl.No.                  Schedule for Admission                           Super Specialty
1.        Conduct of Entrance Examination                       by 10th July

2.        Declaration of the result of the qualifying/Entrance by 15th July
          Examination.
3.        First round of counselling/ admission                 by 31st July

4.        Last date for joining the allotted college and the between 1st and 7th August
          course
5.        Second round of counselling / admission               by 20th August

6.        Last date of joining for the second round of by 27th August
          counselling / admission
7.        Commencement of academic session/term                 1st August

8.        Last date up to which students can be 31st August
          admitted/joined against vacancies arising due to any
          reason
Note: Keeping in view the circumstances and exigencies, Post-Graduate Medical Education
      Board may alter the number of rounds and schedule of counselling.
4.4      Government to appoint a designated authority for Common Counselling – For
         admission to broad specialty post-graduate courses in medicine in medical institutions,
         the Central Government or its designated authority shall be the counselling agency for
         the All-India quota seats and State Government/U.T. Administration shall be the
         counselling agency for the State/Union Territory quota seats. For all the seats in the
         Super Speciality Courses, the Central Government or its designated authority shall be
         the counselling agency.

4.5      Prohibition for any student seeking admission in any other way than counselling –
         No medical institute shall admit any candidate to the Post-Graduate Medical Education


                                                                                             8
      course in contravention of these regulations.

      Provided the medical institution granting admission to any student in contravention of
      these Regulations, shall be fined Rupees one crore or fee for the entire course duration,
      whichever is higher, per seat for the first time and for the second time of non-
      compliance, Rupees two crore or double the amount of fees for the entire course
      duration, whichever is higher per seat; and for any subsequent non-compliance or
      continued contravention, the medical institution shall be fined Rupees two crore or
      double the amount of fees for the entire course duration whichever is higher per seat and
      barred from granting admissions to any student for minimum two academic years from
      the next academic year.

      Provided further that such Student admitted in contravention of this mandate shall be
      discharged from the Medical College and double the number of seats shall be reduced
      for one or more years.

4.6   Submission of the final list – The respective designated authorities (who have
      conducted the Common Counselling) shall submit the final list of students in the
      prescribed proforma to the Post-graduate Medical Education Board within one week of
      the completion of the common counselling, which in turn shall publish that list in the
      NMC website. Provided each institution shall also submit the final list of students
      admitted, in the prescribed proforma to the PGMEB within one week of the last date of
      the joining course, declared by the PGMEB.
      Provided only those medical institutions that were permitted to start the post-graduate
      medical course prior to the date of notification of Common Counselling are allowed to
      admit students; and those medical institutions, who get requisite permission after the
      date of notification of Common Counselling shall participate in the next academic year’s
      common counselling to admit students.

      Explanation: Requisite permission shall also apply mutatis mutandis for increase of
      seat strength in medical institutions already established.

4.7   Student Migration – No student designated to a medical institution, notwithstanding
      anything stated in these Regulations, shall be permitted migration to any other medical
      institution.

4.8   Reservation of Seats - The reservation of seats in medical colleges/institutions for
      respective categories shall be as per applicable laws prevailing in States/Union
      Territories. An all India merit list as well as State-wise merit list of the eligible
      candidates shall be prepared on the basis of the marks obtained in NExT or NEET-PG
      and candidates shall be admitted to post-graduate courses from the said merit lists only.

      Provided further that 5% seats of annual sanctioned intake capacity in Government or
      government aided higher educational institutions shall be filled up by candidates with
      benchmark disabilities in accordance with the provisions of the Rights of Persons with
      Disabilities Act, 2016 based on the merit list of NExT or NEET-PG for admission to
      post-graduate medical courses. For this purpose, the “Specified Disability” contained
      in the Schedule to the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 is annexed at
      Annexure-7 and the eligibility of candidates to pursue a course in medicine with
      specified disability shall be in accordance with Annexure-8. If the seats reserved for



                                                                                           9
         the persons with disabilities in a particular category remain unfilled on account of
         unavailability of candidates, the seats should be included in the annual sanctioned seats
         for the respective category.

4.9      Feeder Broad Speciality Qualifications for Super Speciality courses -
         Prior requirement of Broad Speciality degree qualification to pursue Super Specialty
         course for qualification will be called Feeder Course. List of Feeder Courses to pursue
         Super Speciality course of qualification is as per Annexure-9.



                                          CHAPTER V
                                           TRAINING

5.1      PERIOD OF TRAINING
         The period of training for the award of various post-graduate degrees and diplomas
         shall be as per Chapter-II Section 2.1.


5.2      TRAINING PROGRAMME
(i)      The training given to the post-graduate students during their stay in the accredited
         institutions for the award of various post-graduate degrees, shall determine the
         expertise of the specialist and /or medical teachers produced.

         Provided that in respect of MD/MS students admitted with effect from academic session
         2021, the training imparted as part of District Residency Programme in District
         Health System, as provided for in this Section 5.2(XI) of these Regulations shall be
         considered as training imparted in a medical institution.

(ii)     All post-graduate students will work as full-time resident doctors. They will work for
         reasonable working hours and will be provided reasonable time for rest in a day.
(iii)    Every institution undertaking post-graduate training programme shall set up an
         Academic Cell, under the chairmanship of a senior faculty member, which shall ensure
         and monitor the implementation of training programmes in each specialities.
(iv)     The training programmes shall be updated as and when required while keeping in mind
         the curriculum requirement and other relevant requirements prescribed by NMC from
         time to time. The structured training programme shall be written and strictly followed,
         to enable the examiners to determine the training undergone by the candidates.
(v)      Post-graduate students of broad and super specialty degree courses shall maintain a
         dynamic e-log book which needs to be updated on weekly basis about the work being
         carried out by them and the training programme undergone during the period of
         training. MS/M.Ch students shall mandatorily enter details of surgical procedures
         assisted or done independently.
(vi)     The record (Log) books shall be checked, assessed and authenticated monthly by the
         postgraduate guide imparting the training.
(vii)    The post-graduate students shall be required to participate in the teaching and
         training programme of undergraduate students and interns.
(viii)   During the training for award of Degree/Diploma/Super-specialty in clinical


                                                                                              10
          disciplines, there shall be proper training in basic medical sciences related to the
          disciplines concerned. During the training programmes emphasis has to be laid on
          preventive and social aspects.
(ix)      All post-graduate medical college/institution will have facilities for teaching the basic
          science subjects as per guidelines.
(x)       Post-graduate training shall consists of training of the students through lectures,
          seminars, journal clubs, group discussions, participation in laboratory and
          experimental work, involvement in research, clinical meetings, grand rounds, clinico-
          pathological conferences, practical training in diagnosis and medical and surgical
          treatment, training in the basic medical sciences as well as in allied clinical specialties,
          etc. as per the requirement of speciality training.

          Specialities where patient treatment is involved the teaching and training of the
          students shall include graded responsibility in the management and treatment of
          patients entrusted to their care.
          A post-graduate student of a degree course in broad specialties/super specialties
          would be required to present one poster presentation or to read one paper at a
          national/Zonal/state conference of the respective specialty or to have one research
          paper published/accepted for publication as the first author in the journal of the
          respective specialty to make him eligible to appear in the post-graduate degree
          examination.

(xi)      Common Course work
          The following course work shall be common and mandatory for all broad and super
          specialty post-graduate students irrespective of the specialty.
       (a) Course in Research Methodology
          i.     All post-graduate students shall complete an online course in Research
                 Methodology.
          ii.    The students shall have to register on the portal of the designated training
                 institutions.
          iii.   The students shall complete the course in the first year.
          iv.    The online certificate generated on successful completion of the course and
                 examination thereafter, will be acceptable evidence of having completed this
                 course.
          v.     The above certification shall be a mandatory requirement to be eligible to appear
                 for the final examination of the respective post-graduate course.
          vi.    This requirement shall be applicable for all post-graduate students.
       (b) Course in Ethics
          i.     All post-graduate students shall complete course in Ethics including Good Clinical
                 Practices and Good Laboratory Practices, whichever is relevant to them, to be
                 conducted by institutes/universities.
          ii.    The students shall complete the course in the first year.
          iii.   No post-graduate student shall be permitted to appear in the examination
                 without completing the above course.



                                                                                                  11
       (c) Course in Cardiac Life Support Skills
          i.      All post-graduate students shall complete a course in Basic Cardiac Life Support
                  (BCLS) and Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) skills to be conducted by the
                  institute.
          ii.     The students shall complete the course in the first year.
          iii.    No post-graduate student shall be permitted to appear in the examination without
                  the above certification.
       (d) Others
          Institutions may arrange training in any other courses like awareness in medical
          audit; exposure to human behavior studies; and finance and accounts, etc which are
          beneficial to the post-graduate students.

(xii)     DISTRICT RESIDENCY PROGRAMME (DRP)
  I.      Preamble:
          Doctors have to be trained in diverse settings including those which are close to the
          community. Hence, they should be trained in the District Health System / the District
          Hospitals.

  II.     Objectives:
          The main objectives of the District Residency Programme (DRP) would be:
          a. to expose the post-graduate student to District Health System/ District Hospital
             and involve them in health care services being provided by District Health System
             /District Hospital for learning while serving;
          b. to acquaint them with the planning, implementation, monitoring and assessment of
             outcomes of the National Health programmes at the district level; and
          c. to orient them to promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative services being
             provided by various categories of healthcare professionals under the umbrella of
             National Health Mission.
                 In doing so, the post-graduate medical students would also be contributing
                 towards strengthening of services of the District Health System as specialty
                 resident doctors working as members of the district teams.

  III. Definition of District Hospital:
          For the purpose of this programme, a District Hospital shall be a functional public
          sector/government-funded hospital of not less than 50 beds with facilities/staff for the
          designated specialties at that level/facility.

  IV. Definition of District Health System:
          For the purpose of this programme, the District Health System shall include all
          public sector/government-funded hospitals and facilities (including community health
          centers, primary health centers, sub-health centers, urban health centers, etc.), as well
          as community outreach system in a district. This would also include district system
          engaged in running respective public health services including the implementation of
          national and state public health programmes.



                                                                                               12
V.   District Residency Programme:
     All post-graduate students pursuing MD/MS in broad specialties in all medical
     colleges/institutions under the purview of National Medical Commission shall undergo
     a compulsory residential rotation of three months in District Hospitals/ District
     Health System as a part of the course curriculum. Such rotation shall take place in
     the 3rd or 4th or 5th semester of the post-graduate programme. In case of those
     students who have taken admission after completion of Diploma in the relevant specialty,
     District Residency Programme shall take place in third semester only. Similarly, the
     post-graduate diploma students shall undergo the District Residency Programme in the
     third semester.
     This rotation shall be termed as ‘District Residency Programme’ (DRP) and the post-
     graduate medical student undergoing training shall be termed as a ‘District Resident’.

VI. Training and Responsibilities of District Residents:
     The District Resident will work under the overall directions and supervision of the
     District Residency Programme Coordinator (DRPC).
     During this rotation, the Resident doctor will be posted with the concerned/aligned
     specialty team/unit/ sections/services at the District Health System/ District Hospital,
     The clinical responsibilities assigned to the Residents would include serving in
     outpatient, inpatient, casualty and other areas pertaining to their specialty and
     encompass night duties.
     Post-graduate students of specialities where direct patient care is not involved will be
     trained by District Health System/ District Hospital teams within the available avenues
     in coordination with the District Health Officer/Chief Medical Officer. They would be
     trained in and contribute to the diagnostic/laboratories services, pharmacy services,
     forensic services, general clinical duties, managerial roles and public health
     programmes etc., as applicable. They may also be posted in research units / facilities,
     laboratories and field sites of the Indian Council of Medical Research and other
     national research organizations.

VII. Stipend and Leave for District Residents:
     The District Residents shall continue to draw full stipend from their respective
     medical colleges for the duration of the rotation subject to the attendance record
     submitted by the appropriate district authorities to the parent medical college/institution,
     based on methods and system as prescribed. Subject to exigencies of work, the District
     Resident will be allowed one weekly holiday by rotation. They shall also be entitled
     to leave benefits as per the rules/ guidelines of the parent college / university.

VIII. Training during DRP and Certification thereof:
  a. Quality of training shall be monitored by log books, supportive supervision and
     continuous assessment of performance. The attendance and performance of District
     Residents shall be tracked by the District Residency Programme Coordinator
     (DRPC) of the District concerned, as well as the parent Medical College through an
     appropriate electronic/digital or mobile enabled system. Such monitoring systems shall
     also be accessible to the State/Union Territory Steering Committee and the National
     Coordination Cell.
  b. The District Residents would remain in contact with their designated post-graduate
     teachers and departments at their parent Medical College / Institution by phone and e-


                                                                                             13
     communication for guidance, learning, and for being able to participate remotely in
     scheduled case discussions, seminars, journal clubs, thesis discussion, etc. and other
     academic activities.
 c. Satisfactory completion of the District Residency shall be an essential condition before
    the candidate is allowed to appear in the final examinationof the respective post-
    graduate course.
 d. The District Residency Programme Coordinator (DRPC) shall issue certificate of
    satisfactory completion of DRP and report on the performance of the District
    Resident on a prescribed format to be decided by the PGMEB to the concerned medical
    college and the Govt. of the State/UT.

IX. Responsibility of Medical College/Medical Institution:
     It shall be incumbent upon all medical colleges/ institutions to place the post-graduate
     students at the disposal of the Government of concerned State/Union Territory for
     the District Residency Programme. The faculty of the concerned departments would
     provide guidance to the District Residents by phone/e-communication in accordance
     with Section 5.2.VI.

X.   Responsibility of State Government /Union Territory:
     The State Government /Union Territory shall implement the District Residency
     Programme within their jurisdiction as under:-
 a. The Programme shall be coordinated jointly by the Directorate of Medical Education
    and the Directorate of Health Services. An Officer of the State Government /Union
    Territory shall be designated as the State/UT District Residency Programme (DRP)
    Nodal Officer. The concerned Government shall be responsible for the facilitation,
    oversight and supervision of the District Residency Programme.
 b. The designated State/UT DRP Nodal officer shall identify and designate District Health
    System/ District Hospital that are suitable for such rotation in terms of availability of
    specific specialties, specialists, facilities and services available in consultation with the
    Directorate of Health Services of the State and the medical colleges, and develop a
    placement schedule of the Post-graduate Residents of the medical colleges due for
    rotation at least 6 months in advance. This official will also be responsible for grievance
    redressal at State level.
 c. The State DRP Nodal officer shall undertake rule-based allotment of the training
    facilities to the Post-graduate Residents
 d. The State Government shall provide appropriate amenities to the District Residents,
    including, amongst others, suitable accommodation, mess, transportation to work place
    (if living quarters is far away), security, especially for lady Residents. Accommodation
    could be by means of government premises or that rented by concerned State
    Government and should conform to prescribed norms.
 e. The District Residents shall remain under the jurisdiction of respective State/ UT DRP
    Nodal officer where they are undergoing District Residency.
 f. In case all the Post-graduate Residents of a State/UT cannot be absorbed within their
    respective jurisdiction, possibility of posting them to other States/Union Territories may
    be explored by mutual understanding in consultation with the respective Governments
    facilitated by the National Coordination Cell.
 g. It shall be permissible for the post-graduate students from the North East Zone


                                                                                             14
     (NEZ) in various medical colleges/institutions in the country, to undergo District
     Residency Programme in their respective States.
  h. The State Government/UT may consider providing additional honorarium to the
     District Residents as a token of recognition of their contribution to the healthcare
     services of the States. In addition, the concerned Governments may make provisions
     to incentivize postings to remote and difficult areas, and encourage volunteering by post-
     graduate students to serve at these places.
  i. The concerned State Government shall also designate a senior official of the District
     Health System as the District Residency Programme Coordinator (DRPC) in each
     District for coordinating between the State DRP Nodal officer and the medical
     colleges. The District Residency Programme Coordinator shall also be responsible for
     orienting the Post-graduate Residents to the District health system, supervising the
     postings within the district, ensuring their accommodation, safety and transport needs,
     and for grievance redressal, etc. District Residency Programme Coordinator shall be
     the competent authority for sanctioning leave to District Residents.

XI. Responsibility of National Medical Commission:
     All Medical institutions will submit the DRP posting details of the students to PGMEB
     of National Medical Commission within one week of completion of DRP. The PGMEB
     of National Medical Commission will monitor the training programme and may direct
     necessary changes to the State Government and Medical institutions, if so desired.

XII. Constitution of National/State Oversight Mechanisms:
  a. The National Medical Commission shall constitute a National Steering Committee in
     consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India to
     oversee the implementation of the District Residency Programme.
  b. The National Steering Committee shall be chaired by President, Post-Graduate Medical
     Education Board (PGMEB) or his nominee. The Committee shall comprise nominated
     members from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (not below the rank of
     Director/Deputy Secretary), Nominee of Directorate General of Health Services
     (DGHS) and representatives of at least six State Governments/Union Territories. The
     Committee may submit quarterly reports to the Central Government.
  c. The National Steering Committee shall establish a National Coordination Cell (NCC)
     under the PGMEB of National Medical Commission which shall be responsible for the
     smooth and efficient implementation of the District Residency Programme and
     grievance redressal at national level.
  d. The Governments of State/Union Territory shall constitute a State/UnionTerritory level
     Steering Committee chaired by Principal Secretary/ Secretary (Health) and comprising
     Principal Secretary/Secretary (Medical Education), Director of Health Services,
     Director of Medical Education, Registrar of the Health University and Deans of the
     medical colleges to facilitate the implementation of the District Residency Programme.

XIII. Launch of the District Residency Programme:
     The District Residency Programme shall be implemented with the PG (broad
     specialty) batch that has joined for the post-graduate course in the Academic Session
     2021.




                                                                                           15
5.4   CURRICULUM
      The Post-graduate Medical Education Board shall publish the model curriculum and the
      outcome objectives of the same from time to time on the NMC website, which shall form
      the base for the development of a detailed medical curriculum by the concerned
      Universities, along with the appropriate methodology to impart meaningful education.


5.5   STIPEND TO POSTGRADUATE STUDENTS
      The post-graduate students undergoing post-graduate degree/Diploma/Super-
      Specialty course in all the institutions shall be paid stipend at par with the stipend
      being paid to the post-graduate students of State Government medical
      institutions/Central Government medical institutions, in the State/Union Territory
      where the institution is located.


5.6   LEAVE RULES FOR POSTGRADUATE STUDENTS
      The following leave rules will be followed:
      a. Every post-graduate student will be given minimum 20 days of paid leave per year.
      b. Subject to exigencies of work, post-graduate students will be allowed one weekly
         holiday
      c. Female post-graduate students shall be allowed maternity leave as per existing
         Government rules and regulations
      d. Male post-graduate students shall be allowed paternity leave as per existing
         Government rules and regulations
      e. In addition to minimum 20 days’ paid leave, the candidates will be allowed
         academic paid leave of 5 days per year for entire duration of training period.
      The training period shall be as per Section 2.1 (Chapter-II). If a candidate avails leave
      in excess than the permitted number of days, his/her term of course shall be extended by
      the same number of days to complete the training period. However, one shall be able to
      appear in the examination if one has 80% (eighty percent) of the attendance.


5.7   ACCOMODATION TO POSTGRADUATE STUDENTS
      It will be mandatory for the college to provide appropriate residential accommodation to
      the post-graduate students. However, it will not be mandatory for the post-graduate
      students to stay in the hostel.


                                      CHAPTER VI
                              ROLE OF UNIVERSITITES


6.1   It shall be the duty of all concerned Universities with the medical institutions under
      them, to partner with the National Medical Commission –




                                                                                           16
      a. To implement an appropriate curriculum to provide high-quality and affordable post-
         graduate medical education to the student to make him a competent specialist and/or
         medical teacher.

      b. To provide training in clinical and practical skills along with theoretical knowledge,
         laying emphasis upon attitude, ethics and communication skills to ensure imparting
         competency-based medical education.

      c. Encourage scholars in both self-directed and Assisted learning.

      d. Provide periodic and transparent assessment of medical education being imparted by
         Medical Institutions to meet with highest global standards.

      e. provide a combination of both formative and summative assessment for overall
         successful completion of the Post-graduate programme.

      f. Provide periodic and transparent assessment of medical education being imparted by
         medical institutions across the nation to meet with highest global standards.

      g. Inspire confidence in the students to handle emergencies and calamities at all levels.

6.2   Without prejudice to the above, the concerned University and medical institutions under
      them shall ensure that proper records of the work be maintained so that they form the
      basis of objective, efficient and transparent internal assessment of scholars.

      Provided further that, these maintained and well-classified documents shall be made
      available for consultation at all times, particularly for the purposes of assessment of the
      medical college either by the concerned University or NMC.

6.3   It shall be the constant endeavor of the concerned University to constantly develop
      strategies for optimal utilization of evolving technology by the faculty, medical
      education department and scholars during the period of training at the post-graduation
      level.

6.4   It shall be the constant endeavor of the concerned University to maximize the use of
      digital technology for conducting examination and issuance of Degree/Diploma and
      other certificates in digital mode which should be available on Digi locker platform. All
      the Universities should make all out efforts to start issuance of Certificates in digital
      mode on Digi locker platform as early possible.




                                       CHAPTER VII
          DEPARTMENT, UNITS, FACULTY AND SENIOR RESIDENTS
7.1   Department:
      The name of the Department will be as per the name of the Speciality subject
      (qualification) (Annexure-1, Annexure-2). Each Department will be headed by a
      Professor.




                                                                                             17
      Unit:
      All Departments with inpatient beds will have unit structure (Units), if applicable.

      Faculty:
      Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant Professor will be considered as faculty and
      they will be full time. Appointment and promotion of faculty in various teaching
      Specialities imparting post-graduate medical education in medical institutions, falling
      within the purview of the national medical Commission, has to be in accordance with
      the norms of Teachers Eligibility Qualifications in Medical Institutions Regulations, in
      vogue. The number of faculty requirement and the number of post-graduate students
      registrable under teach faculty will be as per PGMER and PG-MSR norms in vogue.

      In Government institutions, where there is a post of Additional Professor, and a faculty,
      who fulfills all the requirements to become Professor will be considered as Professor for
      all purposes. However, the Government will convert the designation at the earliest.
      Similarly, in Government institutions, where there is a post of Reader, and a faculty,
      who fulfills all the requirements to become Associate Professor will be considered as
      Associate Professor for all purposes. However, the Government will convert the
      designation at the earliest.

      Senior Resident:
      Senior Resident should have post graduate/super speciality qualification in the
      respective speciality.

      Post-graduate courses under any other body like the National Board of
      Examinations in Medical Sciences (NBEMS), etc. are not permissible against the
      very same units, teaching personnel and infrastructure for courses under these
      regulations.

7.2   The faculty of a medical college/institute shall assist the National Medical Commission/
      Boards whenever required for the purpose of assessment and as experts, etc.

7.3   The position of Dean/Director/Principal of Medical College/Institution should be held
      by a person possessing recognized post-graduate medical degree from a
      recognized/accredited institution with a minimum of ten years teaching experience as
      Professor/Associate Professor in a Medical College/ Institution, out of which at least
      five years should be as Professor in the Department. Appointment to these posts shall
      be made on seniority-cum-merit basis. The Dean/Director/Principal of Medical
      Institution shall not hold the post of Head of the Department.

7.4   The Medical Superintendent of the affiliated teaching hospital shall possess a recognized
      post-graduate medical degree from a recognized/accredited institution with a minimum
      of ten years teaching experience as Professor /Associate Professor in the relevant
      departments of the Hospital, out of which at least five years should be as Professor.
      Appointment to these posts shall be made on seniority-cum-merit basis. Medical
      Superintendent shall not occupy the position of the Head of the Department. However,
      he can head the unit.




                                                                                             18
                                         CHAPTER VIII
                                       EXAMINATIONS

8.1      EXAMINATIONS
         The medical college/institute will conduct the Formative Assessment (examination) and
         the University will conduct the Summative Assessment (examination).

         The summative examination shall consist of Theory and Practical. Obtaining a minimum
         of 40% marks in each theory paper and not less than 50% aggregate in all the
         four papers for degree examination in broad specialty and super specialty subjects and
         obtaining 50% marks in practical examination shall be mandatory for passing the
         examination as a whole. Hence a candidate shall secure not less than 50% marks in
         theory and practical including clinical, Objective Structured Clinical Examination
         (OSCE) and viva voce examination. Five per cent of practical marks will be of
         dissertation. External examiner outside the state will evaluate dissertation thesis and
         take viva on it and marks will be given on quality of dissertation and performance in
         viva voce.
         No grace mark is permitted in post-graduate examination either for theory or for
         practical.

8.2      Examiners
      a. The examiner for the post-graduate examination in Broad and Super Specialties shall
         have three years’ experience as recognized Post-graduate Guide in the concerned subject.
      b. The minimum number of examiners for post-graduate examination shall be four. Out
         of which, at least two shall be external examiners and least one of them shall be from
         different university outside the state.
      c. An examiner shall not be appointed for more than two consecutive regular
         examinations for the same institution.

8.3      Valuation
      a. All the teachers of the other colleges of the concerned University or other Universities,
         who are eligible to be post-graduate examiners, can perform the valuation of the answer
         scripts.
      b. All the answer scripts shall be subjected for two valuations by the concerned
         University. The average of the total marks awarded by the two valuators for the paper,
         which is rounded off to the nearest value, shall be considered for computation of the
         results. All the answer scripts, where the difference between two valuations is 15% and
         more of the total marks prescribed for the paper, shall be subjected to third valuation.
         The average of the best two total marks, awarded by the three evaluators for the
         paper, rounded off to the nearest value, shall be considered for final computation
         of the results.
      c. After the computation and declaration of the results, under no circumstances,
         revaluation is permitted by any authority.
      d. All the Health Universities/Institutions imparting post-graduate courses shall implement
         digital valuation.



                                                                                              19
8.4      Number of Examinations
         The university shall conduct not more than two examinations in a year, for any subject,
         with an interval of not less than 4 and not more than 6 months between the two
         examinations.

8.5      Methodology
 A.      Broad Specialties: Doctor of Medicine (MD)/Master of Surgery (MS)
         MD/MS examinations, in any subject shall consist of theory papers, and
         clinical/practical and oral examinations.
      a. Theory
         The theory examination may be of descriptive theory paper type or Multiple Choice
         Question (MCQ) type of equal duration of exam time. The descriptive type of theory
         exam shall be of four theory papers. The first and the fourth paper shall be on basic
         medical sciences and recent advances, respectively.
         The theory examination shall be held well in advance before the clinical and practical
         examination.
      b. Clinical/Practical and Oral
      i. Clinical examination for the subjects in clinical sciences shall be conducted to test the
         knowledge and competence of the candidates for undertaking independent work as a
         specialist/teacher, for which candidates shall be examined for one long case and two
         short cases.
      ii. Practical examination for other subjects shall be conducted to test the knowledge and
          competence of the candidates for making valid and relevant observations based on the
          experimental/ laboratory studies and his ability to perform such studies as are
          relevant to his subject.
  iii. The oral examination shall be thorough and shall aim at assessing the candidate’s
       knowledge and competence about the subject, investigative procedures, therapeutic
       technique and other aspects of the specialty.
 B.      Super Specialties: Doctorate of Medicine (DM)/Magister Chirurgiae (M.Ch.)
         The Examination consists of theory and clinical/practical and oral.
      a. Theory
         There shall be four theory papers. The first and the fourth paper shall be on basic
         medical sciences and recent advances respectively. The theory examination shall be
         held well in advance before the clinical and practical examination.
      b. Clinical/Practical and Oral:
      i. Clinical examination for the subjects in clinical sciences shall be conducted to test the
         knowledge and competence of the candidates for undertaking independent work as a
         specialist/teacher, for which candidates shall be examined for one long case and two
         short cases.
      ii. Practical examination may consist of carrying out special investigative techniques
          for Diagnosis and Therapy. M.Ch. candidates shall also be examined in surgical
          procedures. Oral examination shall be comprehensive enough to test the candidate’s
          overall knowledge of the subject.



                                                                                              20
 C.      Post-graduate Diploma
         Diploma examination in any subject shall consist of theory and practical/clinical and
         oral.
      a. Theory
         There shall be three Theory papers. The first paper shall be on basic medical sciences.
         The theory examination will be held well in advance before the clinical examination.
      b. Clinical and Oral
         Clinical examination for the subject in clinical Science shall be conducted to
         test/aimed at assessing the knowledge and competence of the candidate for
         undertaking independent work as a specialist for which a candidate shall examine a
         minimum of one long case and two short cases.
         The oral examination shall be thorough and shall aim at assessing the candidate’s
         knowledge and competence about the subject, investigative procedures, therapeutic
         technique and other aspects of the specialty.



                                         CHAPTER IX
                                 SANCTION AND PENALTY


9.1      PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS
         For non-compliance or intentional attempt of non-compliance act or omission, the
         PGMEB will penalize the medical college/institution.
9.2      Without prejudice to anything stated at Section 9.1 above, the imposition of the penalty
         may include one/more/ all of the following –
         a.   Issuance of warning with direction to rectify/comply as the case may be by the
              medical institution;
         b.   Monetary penalty not exceeding INR one crore per every violation/act of omission
              committed by the medical institution;
         c.   monetary penalty not exceeding Rupees five lakhs for the faculty/ Head of the
              Department       (HoD)/        Dean/Director/Doctor         submitting        false
              declaration/documents/records (including patients’ records). Further, they can also
              be charged or penalized for misconduct under the Professional Conduct
              Regulations in vogue.
         d.   Withholding the accreditation process;
         e.   recommending to MARB for withholding processing of application(s) for any new
              course including increase of seats in the existing course for that academic year or
              for such number of years.
         f.   Reducing the number of students in the next or subsequent academic years to be
              admitted by the medical institution;
         g.   Stoppage of admission to one or more of the courses in the next or subsequent
              academic years.



                                                                                             21
       h.   Recommending to NMC for withdrawal of permission;
       i.   Withholding and withdrawal of accreditation for a period up to five academic
            years.
       j.   Any attempt to pressurize PGMEB or NMC through individuals or agency will
            lead to immediate halt of the processing the application/request by the medical
            institution.
            Provided further that the medical institution, may be granted a reasonable
            opportunity to rectify the deficiencies and any further action shall be taken if it fails
            to meet the requisite norms. Provided further that, the PGMEB or the NMC may
            also initiate criminal proceedings for furnishing false information, or fabrication of
            false documents as per the criminal law in force at that time.



                                         CHAPTER X
                                     MISCELLANEOUS
10.1   Faculty Development Programme
       The Post-graduate Medical Education Board shall prescribe the Faculty Development
       Programme to enhance the skills of the faculty for post-graduate training, which will
       have to be mandatorily followed.


10.2   Animal Experimentation
       Animal experimentation should continue to be included as an integral part of the
       competency based curriculum of post-graduate courses in Physiology and
       Pharmacology in medical institutions.
       However, the use of non-animal, human relevant methods may be encouraged for
       teaching and training of post-graduate students in these subjects, wherever possible. If
       animals are used as a part of research studies or thesis work, biomedical ethics and
       relevant rules and guidelines framed under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act,
       1960, must be strictly adhered to.
10.3   Collaborative Research
       Impetus may be provided to Research in medical field to produce Physician Scientists
       of highest caliber by collaborative arrangement with other scientific organizations of
       excellence as well as Institutes of Eminence/ Excellence conferred by the Government
       of India. Inter-disciplinary research with AYUSH may be encouraged.



                                        CHAPTER XI
                  AMENDMENTS, SAVING CLAUSE AND REPEAL


11.1   Provision to Amend the Post-Graduate Medical Education Regulations - 2023
       National Medical Commission is empowered to make any addition, deletion, substitution
       or any other amendment to Post-graduate Medical Education Regulations -2023, as and


                                                                                                22
       when required. The Post-graduate Medical Education Board is empowered to issue
       advisories and clarifications as and when required. The National Steering Committee
       constituted under Section 5.3(XII) to oversee the District Residency Programme (DRP)
       and will suggest practical ways in implementing District Residency Programme to
       achieve the objectives.


11.2   Saving Clause
       Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regulations, any actions made under the
       “Post-graduate Medical Education Regulations, 2000” or the “The Opening of a New
       or Higher Course of Study or Training (including Post-graduate Course of Study or
       Training) and Increase of Admission Capacity in any course of Study or Training
       (including a Post-Graduate course of Study or Training) Regulations, 2000” or the
       recommendation of the Councils prior to that, shall be protected.


11.3   Repeal
       The “Post-graduate Medical Education Regulations, 2000” and “The Opening of a New
       or Higher Course of Study or Training (including Post-graduate Course of Study or
       Training) and Increase of Admission Capacity in any course of Study or Training
       (including a Post-Graduate course of Study or Training) Regulations, 2000” are hereby
       repealed.



                                                  DR VIJAY OZA, PRESIDENT (PGMEB)


Note: These Regulations are being published in English and Hindi, the English version shall
      prevail in case of any doubt about the interpretation of these Regulations.




                                                                                        23
                                                               Annexure-1
                                                        [See Section 2.1(i)]

LIST  OF   RECOGNISED              POST-GRADUATE    BROAD   SPECIALITY
QUALIFICATIONS (MD/MS)

A.    MD (Doctor of Medicine)

1.    MD (Aerospace Medicine)
2.    MD (Anatomy)
3.    MD (Anesthesiology)
4.    MD (Biochemistry)
5.    MD (Biophysics)
6.    MD (Community Medicine)
7.    MD (Dermatology, Venerology and Leprosy)
8.    MD (Emergency Medicine)
9.    MD (Family Medicine)
10.   MD (Forensic Medicine and Toxicology)
11.   MD (General Medicine)
12.   MD (Geriatrics)
13.   MD (Health Administration)
14.   MD (Hospital Administration)
15.   MD (Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion)
16.   MD (Laboratory Medicine)
17.   MD (Marine Medicine)
18.   MD (Master of Public Health (Epidemiology)
19.   MD (Microbiology)
20.   MD (Nuclear Medicine)
21.   MD (Paediatrics)
22.   MD (Palliative Medicine)
23.   MD (Pathology)
24.   MD (Pharmacology)
25.   MD (Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation)
26.   MD (Physiology)
27.   MD (Psychiatry)
28.   MD (Radiation Oncology)
29.   MD (Radio-diagnosis)


                                                                          24
30.   MD (Respiratory Medicine)
31.   MD (Sports Medicine)
32.   MD (Tropical Medicine)



B.    MS (Master of Surgery)
1.    MS (General Surgery)
2.    MS (Obstetrics & Gynecology)
3.    MS (Ophthalmology)
4.    MS (Orthopedics)
5.    MS (Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck) - earlier known by Otorhinolaryngology
6.    MS (Traumatology and Surgery)




                                                                                   25
                                                                       Annexure-2
                                                                 [See Section 2.1(ii)]


LIST  OF   RECOGNISED                  POST-GRADUATE         SUPER    SPECIALITY
QUALIFICATIONS (DM/MCh)


 1.    DM (Cardiac Anaesthesia)
 2.    DM (Cardiology)
 3.    DM (Child and Adolescent Psychiatry)
 4.    DM (Clinical Haematology)
 5.    DM (Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology)
 6.    DM (Critical Care Medicine)
 7.    DM (Endocrinology)
 8.    DM (Geriatric Mental Health)
 9.    DM (Hepatology)
 10.   DM (Infectious Disease)
 11.   DM (Interventional Radiology)
 12.   DM (Medical Gastroenterology)
 13.   DM (Medical Genetics)
 14.   DM (Medical Oncology)
 15.   DM (Neonatology)
 16.   DM (Nephrology)
 17.   DM (Neuro Anaesthesia)
 18.   DM (Neurology)
 19.   DM (Neuro-radiology)
 20.   DM (Onco-Pathology)
 21.   DM (Organ Transplant Anaesthesia and Critical Care)

 22.   DM (Paediatric and Neonatal Anaesthesia)
 23.   DM (Paediatric Cardiology)
 24.   DM (Paediatric Critical Care)
 25.   DM (Paediatric Gastroenterology)
 26.   DM (Paediatric Hepatology)




                                                                                    26
 27.        DM (Paediatric Nephrology)
 28.        DM (Paediatric Neurology)
 29.        DM (Paediatric Oncology)
 30.        DM (Pulmonary Medicine)
 31.        DM (Virology)

A.          MCh (Magister of Chirurgiae)

       1.*     MCh (Cardiac Surgery)
       2.      MCh (Endocrine Surgery)
       3.      MCh (Gynaecological Oncology)
       4.      MCh (Hand Surgery)
       5.      MCh (Head and Neck Surgery)
       6.      MCh (Hepato-Pancreato-Billiary-Surgery)
       7.      MCh (Neurosurgery)
       8.      MCh (Paediatric Cardio Thoracic and Vascular Surgery)
       9.      MCh (Paediatric Orthopaedics)
       10.     MCh (Paediatric Surgery)
       11.     MCh (Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery)
       12.     MCh (Reproductive Medicine and Surgery)
       13.     MCh (Surgical Gastroenterology)
       14.     MCh (Surgical Oncology)
       15.* MCh (Thoracic Surgery)
       16.     MCh (Urology)
       17.     MCh (Vascular Surgery)
       18.* MCh (Cardio Vascular & Thoracic Surgery)


     * Existing Cardio Vascular & Thoracic Surgery (CTVS) course is being bifurcated into
            Cardiac Surgery and Thoracic Surgery with change in curriculum and other
            requirements. There will be transition period of three years. At the end of three years
            (i.e. after 2026) there will no admission in course. Changes in Curriculum and other
            requirements will be gradual, and will be notified. There will be no new permission to
            start or increase in seats in Cardio Vascular & Thoracic Surgery (CTVS) Course after
            publication of these Regulations.




                                                                                                 27
                                                                         Annexure-3
                                                                [See Section 2.1(iii)]

      LIST OF RECOGNISED POST-GRADUATE DIPLOMA QUALIFICATIONS


1.      Allergy and Clinical Immunology
2.      Anesthesiology (D.A.)
3.      Clinical Pathology (D.C.P.)
4.      Community Medicine (D.C.M.)/ Public Health (D.P.H.)
5.      Dermatology, Venerology and Leprosy (DDVL)
6.      Forensic Medicine (D.F.M.)
7.      Health Education (D.H.E.)
8.      Health Administration (D.H.A.)
9.      Immuno-Haematology & Blood Transfusion (D.I.H.B.T.)
10.     Marine Medicine (Dip. M.M.)
11.     Microbiology (D.Micro)
12.     Nutrition (D.N.)
13.     Obstetrics & Gynecology (D.G.O.)
14.     Occupational Health (D.O.H.)
15.     Ophthalmology (D.O.)
16.     Orthopedics (D.Ortho.)
17.     Otorhinolaryngology (D.L.O.)
18.     Paediatrics ( D.C.H.)
19.     Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation (D.Phy. Med. & R.)
20.     Psychiatry (D.P.M.)
21.     Radiation Medicine (D.R.M.)
22.     Radio-diagnosis (D.M.R.D.)
23.     Radio-therapy (D.M.R.T.)
24.     Radiological Physics (D.R.P.)
25.     Sport Medicine (D.S.M.)
26.     Tropical Medicine & Health (D.T.M. & H.)
27.     Tuberculosis & Chest Diseases (D.T.C.D.)
28.     Virology (D.Vir.)




                                                                                    28
                                                                         Annexure-4
                                                                  [See Section 2.1(iv)]



LIST OF RECOGNISED POST-DOCTORAL CERTIFICATE COURSES (PDCC)
QUALIFICATION

1.    PDCC in Organ Transplant Anaesthesia
2.    PDCC in Paediatric Endocrinology
3.    PDCC in Laboratory Immunology

4.    PDCC in Nuclear Nephrology
5.    PDCC in Renal Pathology
6.    PDCC in Gastro-Radiology

7.    PDCC in Aphaeresis Technology and Blood Component Therapy
8.    PDCC in Pain Management
9.    PDCC in Haemato-Oncology

10.   PDCC in Paediatric Endocrinology
11.   PDCC in Paediatric ENT
12.   PDCC in Spine Surgery




                                                                                     29
                                                   Annexure-5
                                             [See Section 2.1(v)]



LIST  OF   RECOGNISED   POST-DOCTORAL   FELLOWSHIP       (PDF)
QUALIFICATION




                                                               30
                                                         Annexure-6
                                                 [See Section 2.1(vi)]



         LIST OF DM/M.CH COURSES OF SIX YEARS DURATION


1.   DM Neurology
2.   M.Ch Neurosurgery




                                                                    31
                                                                                Annexure-7
                                                                            [See Section 4.8]


          Schedule to the Rights of Persons With Disabilities (RPWD) Act, 2016

                              “SPECIFIED DISABILITY”

1.     Physical disability

A.     Locomotor disability (a person’s inability to execute distinctive activities associated
       with movement of self and objects resulting from affliction of musculoskeletal or
       nervous system or both), including –

 (a)   “leprosy cured person” means a person who has been cured of leprosy but is suffering
       from –
        (i) loss of sensation in hands or feet as well as loss of sensation and paresis in the
             eye and eye-lid but with no manifest deformity;
       (ii) manifest deformity and paresis but having sufficient mobility in their hands and
             feet to enable them to engage in normal economic activity;
       (iii) extreme physical deformity as well as advanced age which prevents him/her
             from undertaking any gainful occupation, and the expression “leprosy cured”
             shall be construed accordingly;

 (b)   “cerebral palsy” means a group of non-progressive neurological condition affecting
       body movements and muscle coordination, caused by damage to one or more specific
       areas of the brain, usually occurring before, during or shortly after birth;

 (c)   “dwarfism” means a medical or genetic condition resulting in an adult height of 4 feet
       10 inches (147 centimeters) or less;

 (d)   “muscular dystrophy” means a group of hereditary genetic muscle disease that
       weakens the muscles that move the human body and persons with multiple dystrophy
       have incorrect and missing information in their genes, which prevents them from
       making the proteins they need for healthy muscles. It is characterised by progressive
       skeletal muscle weakness, defects in muscle proteins, and the death of muscle cells
       and tissue;

 (e)   “acid attack victims” means a person disfigured due to violent assaults by throwing
       of acid or similar corrosive substance.

B.     Visual impairment—
 (a)   “blindness” means a condition where a person has any of the following conditions,
       after best correction—
       (i) total absence of sight; or
       (ii) visual acuity less than 3/60 or less than 10/200 (Snellen) in the better eye with
             best possible correction; or
       (iii) limitation of the field of vision subtending an angle of less than 10 degree.

 (b)   “low-vision” means a condition where a person has any of the following conditions,



                                                                                            32
       namely:—
       (i) visual acuity not exceeding 6/18 or less than 20/60 up to 3/60 or up to 10/200
            (Snellen) in the better eye with best possible corrections; or
       (ii) limitation of the field of vision subtending an angle of less than 40 degree up to
            10 degree.

C.     Hearing impairment—
 (a)   “deaf” means persons having 70 DB hearing loss in speech frequencies in both ears;
 (b)   “hard of hearing” means person having 60 DB to 70 DB hearing loss in speech
       frequencies in both ears;

D.     “speech and language disability” means a permanent disability arising out of
       conditions such as laryngectomy or aphasia affecting one or more components of
       speech and language due to organic or neurological causes.

2.     Intellectual disability, a condition characterised by significant limitation both in
       intellectual functioning (reasoning, learning, problem solving) and in adaptive
       behaviour which covers a range of every day, social and practical skills, including -

 (a)   “specific learning disabilities” means a heterogeneous group of conditions wherein
       there is a deficit in processing language, spoken or written, that may manifest itself as
       a difficulty to comprehend, speak, read, write, spell, or to do mathematical
       calculations and includes such conditions as perceptual disabilities, dyslexia,
       dysgraphia, dyscalculia, dyspraxia and developmental aphasia;

 (b)   “autism spectrum disorder” means a neuro-developmental condition typically
       appearing in the first three years of life that significantly affects a person's ability to
       communicate, understand relationships and relate to others, and is frequently
       associated with unusual or stereotypical rituals or behaviours.

3.     Mental behaviour,— “mental illness” means a substantial disorder of thinking,
       mood, perception, orientation or memory that grossly impairs judgment, behaviour,
       capacity to recognise reality or ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, but does
       not include retardation which is a condition of arrested or incomplete development of
       mind of a person, specially characterised by sub normality of intelligence.

4.     Disability caused due to—

 (a)   chronic neurological conditions, such as—
       (i) “multiple sclerosis” means an inflammatory, nervous system disease in which
            the myelin sheaths around the axons of nerve cells of the brain and spinal cord
            are damaged, leading to demyelination and affecting the ability of nerve cells in
            the brain and spinal cord to communicate with each other;
       (ii) “parkinson's disease” means a progressive disease of the nervous system marked
            by tremor, muscular rigidity, and slow, imprecise movement, chiefly affecting
            middle-aged and elderly people associated with degeneration of the basal
            ganglia of the brain and a deficiency of the neurotransmitter dopamine.




                                                                                                33
     (b)   Blood disorder—
           (i) “haemophilia” means an inheritable disease, usually affecting only male but
                 transmitted by women to their male children, characterised by loss or
                 impairment of the normal clotting ability of blood so that a minor wound may
                 result in fatal bleeding;
           (ii) “thalassemia” means a group of inherited disorders characterised by reduced or
                 absent amounts of haemoglobin.
           (iii) “sickle cell disease” means a hemolytic disorder characterised by chronic
                 anemia, painful events, and various complications due to associated tissue and
                 organ damage; “hemolytic” refers to the destruction of the cell membrane of red
                 blood cells resulting in the release of hemoglobin.

5.         Multiple Disabilities (more than one of the above specified disabilities) including
           deaf blindness which means a condition in which a person may have combination of
           hearing and visual impairments causing severe communication, developmental, and
           educational problems.

6.         Any other category as may be notified by the Central Government.


Note: Any amendment to the Schedule to the RPWD Act, 2016, shall consequently
      stand amended in the above Annexure.




                                                                                              34
                                                                                                                     Annexure-8
                                                                                                                 [See Section 4.8]


Guidelines regarding admission of students with “Specified Disabilities” under the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 with respect to admission in Post-graduate
Courses in Modern Medicine

Note 1. The “Certificate of Disability” shall be issued in accordance with the Rights of
        Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017 notified in the Gazette of India by the
        Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment [Department of Empowerment of
        Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)] on 15th June 2017.
       2. The extent of “specified disability” in a person shall be assessed in accordance with
          the “Guidelines for the purpose of assessing the extent of specified disability in a
          person included under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of
          2016)” notified in the Gazette of India by the Ministry of Social Justice and
          Empowerment [Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities
          (Divyangjan)] on 4th January 2018.
       3. The minimum degree of disability should be 40% (Benchmark Disability) in
          order to be eligible for availing reservation for persons with specified disability.

       4. The term ‘Persons with Disabilities’ (PwD) is to be used instead of the term
          ‘Physically Handicapped’ (PH).

                                                                                              Disability Range



         Disability Type
 S.
 No.                              Type of                                 Eligible     for Eligible for Medical        Not Eligible for
                                                   Specified Disability   Medical Course, Course, Eligible for         Medical Course
                                 Disabilities
                                                                          Not Eligible for PwD Quota
                                                                          PwD Quota

                               A. Locomotor
  1.                                        a. Leprosy cured person* Less than 40%         40-80% disability.          More than 80%
                               Disability,
                                                                     disability
                               including                                                   Persons with more than
                               Specified    b. Cerebral Palsy**
                                                                                           80% disability may also
                               Disabilities                                                be allowed on case to
                               (a to f).    c. Dwarfism                                    case basis and their




         Physical Disability
                                                                                           functional competency
                                                d. Muscular Dystrophy                      will be determined with
                                                                                           the aid of assistive
                                                e. Acid attack victims                     devices, if it is being
                                                                                           used, to see if it is
                                                f. Others*** such as                       brought below 80% and
                                                   Amputation,                             whether they possess
                                                   Poliomyelitis, etc.                     sufficient motor ability
                                                                                           as required to pursue and
                                                                                           complete the course
                                                                                           satisfactorily.




                                                                                                                                 35
                                                 *     Attention should be paid to loss of sensations in fingers and hands, amputation, as well
                                                       as involvement of eyes and corresponding recommendations be looked at.
                                                 **     Attention should be paid to impairment of vision, hearing, cognitive function, etc. and
                                                        corresponding recommendations be looked at.
                                                 *** Both hands intact, with intact sensations, sufficient strength and range of motion are
                                                     essential to be considered eligible for medical course.

                                B. Visual        a. Blindness                 Less than 40%                                    Equal to or more
                                Impairment                                    disability                                       than 40%
                                                                                                                ----
                                (*)              b. Low vision                                                                 Disability

                                 C. Hearing
                                            a. Deaf                           Less than 40%                                    Equal to or
                                 Impairment
                                                                              Disability                                       more than 40%
                                 @          b. Hard of hearing                                                  ----
                                                                                                                               Disability

                                                 (*) Persons with Visual impairment / visual disability of more than 40% may be made
                                                     eligible to pursue Post-graduate Medical Education and may be given reservation,subject
                                                     to the condition that the visual disability is brought to a level of less than the benchmark
                                                     of 40% with advanced low vision aids such as telescopes / magnifier etc.
                                                 @ Persons with hearing disability of more than 40% may be made eligible to pursue Post-
                                                   graduate Medical Education and may be given reservation, subject to the condition that
                                                   the hearing disability is brought to a level of less than the benchmark of 40% with the
                                                   aid of assistive devices. In addition to this, the individual should have a speech
                                                   discrimination score of more than 60 %.


                                 D. Speech & Organic/ neurological causes                  Less than        -                  Equal to or more
                                   language                                                40%                                 than 40%
                                  disability$                                              Disability                          Disability


                                 $ Persons with Speech Intelligibility Affected (SIA) shall be eligible to pursue post-graduate courses,
                                   provided Speech Intelligibility Affected (SIA) score shall not exceed 3(three), which is 40% or below.

                                 Persons with Aphasia shall be eligible to pursue post-graduate courses, provided Aphasia Quotient (AQ) is
                                 40% or below.


                                                                                                        Disability Range




      Disability Type
                                                                              Eligible     for Eligible for Medical
Sl.                                Type of            Specified Disability    Medical Course, Course, Eligible for Not    Eligible
                                                                              Not Eligible for PwD Quota            for   Medical
No.                               Disabilities
                                                                              PwD Quota                             Course



2.                                               a. Specific learning     # Currently there is no Quantification scale available to assess the
                                                 disabilities (Perceptual severity of SpLD, therefore the cut-off of 40% is arbitrary and
                                                 disabilities, Dyslexia,  more evidence is needed.
                                                 Dyscalculia, Dyspraxia &
                                                                           Less than 40% Equal to or more than More than 80%




      Intellectual Disability
                                                 Developmental aphasia)#
                                                                           Disability            40% disability and or severe nature
                                                                                                 equal to or less than or          significant
                                                                                                 80%.                      cognitive/intellect
                                                                                                 But selection will be     ual disability
                                                                                                    based on the learning
                                                                                                    competency evaluated
                                                                                                    with the help of the
                                                                                                    remediation/assisted
                                                                                                    technology/aids/infras
                                                                                                    tructural changes by
                                                                                                    the Expert Panel




                                                                                                                                           36
                                                                      b. Autism spectrum         Absence or Mild         Currently            not    More than 60%
                                                                         disorders               Disability,             recommended due to          disability  or
                                                                                                 Asperger                lack     of    objective    presence    of
                                                                                                 syndrome                method to establish         cognitive/intellectu
                                                                                                 (disability of up to    presence and extent of      aldisability and/or
                                                                                                 60%       as    per     mental           illness.   if the person is
                                                                                                 ISAA) where the         However, the benefit        unfit for pursuing
                                                                                                 individual is fit       of reservation/quota        post-graduate
                                                                                                 for post-graduate       may be considered in        course by an
                                                                                                 course by an            future after developing     expert panel
                                                                                                 expert panel            better methods of
                                                                                                                         disability assessment.
3.                                                                        Mental illness         Absence or mild         Currently            not    No          mental
                                                                                                 Disability: less        recommended due to          disorder is barred
                                                                                                 than 40% (under         lack     of    objective    from pursuing PG




     Mental behaviour
                                                                                                 IDEAS)                  method to establish         Medical
                                                                                                                         presence and extent of      education subject
                                                                                                                         mental           illness.   to being eligible
                                                                                                                         However, the benefit        in NExT/NEET-
                                                                                                                         of reservation/quota        PG
                                                                                                                         may be considered in
                                                                                                                         future after developing
                                                                                                                         better methods of
                                                                                                                         disability assessment.
4.                                                     a. Chronic   i. Multiple Sclerosis        Less than 40%               40-80% disability        More than 80%




      Disability caused due to
                                                       Neurological                              Disability
                                                       Conditions   ii. Parkinsonism

                                                       b. Blood       i. Haemophilia             Less than 40%               40-80% disability        More than 80%
                                                          Disorders                              Disability
                                                                      ii. Thalassemia

                                                                      iii. Sickle cell disease


5.                                                                    More than one of the Must consider all above while deciding in individual cases
                                                                      above        specified recommendations with respect to presence any of the above,




      Multiple disabilities including deaf blindness
                                                                      disabilities           namely, Visual, Hearing, Speech & Language disability,
                                                                                             Intellectual Disability, and Mental Illness as a component of
                                                                                             Multiple Disability.
                                                                                                 Combining Formula as notified by the related Gazette
                                                                                                 Notification issued by the Govt. of India


                                                                                                 a +      b (90-a)
                                                                                                                        90
                                                                                                 (where a= higher value of disability % and b=lower value of
                                                                                                 disability % as calculated for different disabilities)
                                                                                                 is recommended for computing the disability arising when more
                                                                                                 than one disabling condition is present in a given individual. This
                                                                                                 formula may be used in cases with multiple disabilities, and
                                                                                                 recommendations regarding admission and/or reservation made
                                                                                                 as per the specific disabilities present in a given individual.




                                                                                                                                                                 37
                                                                       Annexure-9
                                                                    [See Section 4.9]

FEEDER BROAD SPECIALTY QUALIFICATIONS FOR SUPER SPECIALITY
COURSES

A.    DM (Doctorate of Medicine)
Sl.          Area of Specialization              Feeder Broad Speciality
No.                                                  Qualification(s)

1.    DM (Cardiac Anaesthesia)            MD Anaesthesia

2.    DM (Cardiology)                     MD General Medicine
                                          MD Paediatrics
                                          MD Respiratory Medicine

3.    DM (Child and Adolescent Psychiatry) MD Psychiatry

4.    DM (Clinical Haematology)           MD Biochemistry
                                          MD General Medicine
                                          MD Paediatrics
                                          MD Pathology
5.    DM (Clinical      Immunology    and MD General Medicine
      Rheumatology)                       MD Paediatrics
6.    DM (Critical Care Medicine)         MD Anaesthesia
                                          MD General Medicine
                                          MD Paediatrics
                                          MD Respiratory Medicine
                                          MD Emergency Medicine
7.    DM (Endocrinology)                  MD General Medicine
                                          MD Paediatrics
8.    DM (Geriatric Mental Health)        MD Psychiatry

9.    DM (Hepatology)                     MD General Medicine
                                          MD Paediatrics
10. DM (Infectious Disease)               MD General Medicine
                                          MD Paediatrics
                                          MD Microbiology
                                          MD Respiratory Medicine
11. DM (Interventional Radiology)         MD Radio-diagnosis

12. DM (Medical Gastroenterology)         MD General Medicine




                                                                                   38
Sl.         Area of Specialization            Feeder Broad Speciality
No.                                               Qualification(s)

13. DM (Medical Genetics)              MD/MS in any subject

14. DM (Medical Oncology)              MD General Medicine
                                       MD Paediatrics
15. DM (Neonatology)                   MD Paediatrics

16. DM (Nephrology)                    MD General Medicine
                                       MD Paediatrics

17. DM (Neuro Anaesthesia)             MD Anaesthesia

18. DM (Neurology)                     MD General Medicine
                                       MD Paediatrics

19. DM (Neuro-radiology)               MD Radio-diagnosis

20. DM (Onco-Pathology)                MD Pathology

21. DM (Organ Transplant Anaesthesia MD Anaesthesia
    and Critical Care)
22. DM (Paediatric      and    Neonatal MD Anaesthesia
    Anaesthesia)
23. DM (Paediatric Cardiology)          MD Paediatrics

24. DM (Paediatric Critical Care)      MD Paediatrics

25. DM (Paediatric Gastroenterology)   MD Paediatrics

26. DM (Paediatric Hepatology)         MD Paediatrics

27. DM (Paediatric Nephrology)         MD Paediatrics

28. DM (Paediatric Neurology)          MD Paediatrics

29. DM (Paediatric Oncology)           MD Paediatrics

30. DM (Pulmonary Medicine)            MD General Medicine
                                       MD Respiratory Medicine
                                       MD Paediatrics
31. DM (Virology)                      MD Microbiology




                                                                        39
B.     M.Ch. (Magister of Chirurgiae)
 Sl.       Area of Specialization                  Feeder Broad Speciality
 No.                                                   Qualification(s)
 1.* M.Ch (Cardiac Surgery)                    MS General Surgery
 2.    M.Ch. (Endocrine Surgery)               MS General Surgery
 3.    M.Ch. (Gynaecological Oncology)         MD/MS Obstetrics & Gynaecology
 4.    M.Ch. (Hand Surgery)                    MS Orthopaedics

 5.    M.Ch. (Head and Neck Surgery)           MS Otorhinolaryngology – Head & Neck
                                               MS General Surgery

 6.    M.Ch.     (Hepato-Pancreato-Billiary- MS General Surgery
       Surgery)
 7.    M.Ch. (Neurosurgery)                  MS General Surgery
                                             MS Otorhinolaryngology – Head & Neck
 8.    M.Ch. (Paediatric Cardio Thoracic MS General Surgery
       and Vascular Surgery)
 9.    M.Ch. (Paediatric Orthopaedics)         MS Orthopaedics
 10.   M.Ch. (Paediatric Surgery)        MS General Surgery
 11.   M.Ch. (Plastic & Reconstructive MS General Surgery
       Surgery)                          MS Otorhinolaryngology – Head & Neck
 12.   M.Ch. (Reproductive Medicine and MD/MS Obstetrics and Gynaecology
       Surgery)
 13.   M.Ch. (Surgical Gastroenterology) MS General Surgery
 14.   M.Ch. (Surgical Oncology)               MS General Surgery
                                               MS Otorhinolaryngology – Head & Neck
                                               MS Orthopaedics
                                               MS Obstetrics and Gynaecology
 15.* M.Ch. (Thoracic Surgery)                 MS General Surgery
 16.   M.Ch. (Urology)                         MS General Surgery
 17.   M.Ch. (Vascular Surgery)                MS General Surgery
 18.* M.Ch. (Cardio Vascular & Thoracic MS General Surgery
      Surgery)
   * Existing Cardio Vascular & Thoracic Surgery (CTVS) course is being bifurcated into
      Cardiac Surgery and Thoracic Surgery with change in curriculum and other
      requirements. There will be transition period of three years. At the end of three years
      (i.e. after 2026) there will no admission in course. Changes in Curriculum and other
      requirements will be gradual, and will be notified. There will be no new permission to
      start or increase in seats in Cardio Vascular & Thoracic Surgery (CTVS) Course after
      publication of these Regulations.




                                                                                           40
