  NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION
  Postgraduate Medical Education Board

D 11011/1/22/AC/Guidelines/15   Date: 05-08-2022




    GUIDELINES FOR COMPETENCY
              BASED
      POSTGRADUATE TRAINING
       PROGRAMME FOR M.D. IN
            PSYCHIATRY




                                                   1
     GUIDELINES FOR COMPETENCY BASED
POSTGRADUATE TRAINING PROGRAMME FOR MD IN
               PSYCHIATRTY

Preamble
The purpose of PG education is to create specialists who would provide high quality
health care and advance the cause of science through research & training.


A postgraduate specialist having undergone the required training should be able to
recognize the health needs of the community, should be competent to handle medical
problems effectively and should be aware of the recent advances pertaining to his
specialty. The post graduate student should acquire the basic skills in teaching of
medical/para-medical students. She/he is also expected to know the principles of research
methodology and modes of consulting library.


The purpose of this document is to provide teachers and learners illustrative guidelines to
achieve defined outcomes through learning and assessment. This document was prepared
by various subject-content specialists. The Reconciliation Board of the Academic
Committee has attempted to render uniformity without compromise to purpose and
content of the document. Compromise in purity of syntax has been made in order to
preserve the purpose and content. This has necessitated retention of “domains of
learning” under the heading “competencies”.



              SUBJECT SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES

The primary goal of the MD course in Psychiatry is to produce a post graduate clinician
able to provide health care in the field of Psychiatry. A physician qualified in Psychiatry,
at the end of the course, should be able to diagnose and treat psychiatric disorders, take
preventive and curative steps for the disease in the community at all levels of health care
and qualify as a consultant and teacher in the subject.


At the end of the MD course in Psychiatry, the student should be able to:
   ● Understand the relevance of mental health in relation to the health needs of the
       country,
   ● Ethical considerations in the teaching and practice of Psychiatry,
   ● Identify the social, economic, biological and emotional determinants of mental
       health,
   ● Identify the environmental causes as determinants of mental health,
   ● institute appropriate diagnostic, therapeutic and rehabilitative procedures to the
       mentally ill patient,


                                                                                          2
    ● Take detailed history, conduct appropriate ethically valid physical examination
        and institute appropriate evaluation procedures to make a correct clinical
        diagnosis,
    ● Perform relevant investigative and therapeutic procedures for the psychiatric
        patient,
    ● Recommend appropriate laboratory and imaging examinations and interpret the
        results correctly,
    ● Plan and deliver comprehensive treatment of a psychiatric patient using principles
        of rational drug therapy,
    ● Plan rehabilitation of psychiatric patient suffering from chronic illness,
    ● Clinically manage psychiatric emergencies efficiently,
    ● Demonstrate empathy and humane approach towards patients and their families
        and respect their sensibilities,
    ● Demonstrate communication skills of a high order in explaining management and
        prognosis, providing counselling and giving health education messages to
        patients, families and communities,
    ● Develop appropriate skills to practice evidence-based psychiatry,
    ● Demonstrate competence in basic concepts of research methodology and
        epidemiology,
    ● Be aware of and take appropriate steps in the implementation of national mental
        health programs, effectively and responsibly,
    ● Be aware of the concept of essential drugs and rational use of drugs,
    ● Be aware of the legal issues in the practise of Psychiatry,
    ● Be aware of the special requirements in the practice of Child and adolescent
        Psychiatry and Geriatric Psychiatry.
    ●   Be aware of the role of sex and gender in the practice of psychiatry
    ●   Be able to determine the capacity and capability of the individual (especially children and
        adolescents) to identify and articulate a gender identity

o       Research: The student should know the basic concepts of research methodology
        and plan a research project in accordance with ethical principles. S/he should also
        be able to interpret research findings and apply these in clinical practice. S/he
        should know how to access and utilize information resources and should have
        basic knowledge of statistics.
o       Teaching: S/He should learn the basic methodology of teaching and develop
        competence in teaching medical/paramedical students, health professionals,
        members of allied disciplines (e.g. behavioural sciences), law enforcement
        agencies, families and consumers and members of the public.




                                                                                                 3
               SUBJECT SPECIFIC COMPETENCIES
By the end of the course, the student should have acquired knowledge (cognitive
domain), professionalism (affective domain) and skills (psychomotor domain) as
given below:


A. Cognitive domain
By the end of the course, the student should demonstrate knowledge in the
following:

1. General topics:

   1. The student should be able to demonstrate knowledge of basic sciences
      (Anatomy,      Physiology,     Biochemistry,       Microbiology,   Pathology    and
      Pharmacology) as applied to Psychiatry.
   2. The student should be able to explain aetiology, assessment, classification and
      management and prognosis of various psychiatric disorders (including psychiatric
      sub-specialities including Neuroanatomy, Neurophysiology, Neurochemistry,
      Neuroimaging,             Electrophysiology,              Psychoneuroendocrinology,
      Psychoneuroimmunology,         Chronobiology and Neurogenetics.
   3. Acquire knowledge of delirium, dementia, and amnestic and other cognitive
      disorders and mental disorders due to a general medical condition.
   4. The student should be able to discuss long term care of persons with chronic
      mental health problems
   5. The student should acquire knowledge of emergency measures in acute crisis
      arising out of various psychiatric illnesses including drug detoxification and
      withdrawal.
   6. The student should acquire knowledge of pharmacokinetics & pharmacodynamics
      of drugs involved in psychiatric management of patients.
   7. The student should acquire knowledge of (a) normal child development and
      adolescence (b) neurodevelopmental disorders, intellectual disability and specific
      learning disability and their management
   8. The student should acquire knowledge and be able to explain mechanisms for
      rehabilitation of psychiatric patients.
   9. The student should acquire knowledge of substance related disorders and their
      management.
   10. The student should acquire knowledge of psychotic disorders, mood disorders,
      and anxiety disorders and their management
   11. The student should understand difference between sex and gender/ biological and
      social construction of personhood; sexual/gender identity; transgender, gender
      non-conformity, and other gender diverse identities, sexual/sexuality identity,
      sexual orientation, sexual desire;        the wide variety, and cultural presence of
      various sexual orientations and desires; gender dysphoria and its management.

                                                                                        4
     12. The student should acquire knowledge of eating disorders and sleep disorders and
          their management
     13. The student should be conversant with recent advances in Psychiatry.
     14. The student should be conversant with routine bedside diagnostic and therapeutic
          procedures and acquire knowledge of latest diagnostics and therapeutics
          procedures available.
     15. The student should be conversant with various policy related aspects of
          Psychiatric practice in India (e.g. Mental Health Act, National Health Mental
          Health Programmes etc.).
     16. The student should be conversant with research methodologies.
     17. Student should be conversant with the role of Yoga and Meditation in the
          management of psychiatric disorders.


B.        Affective Domain:


1.        The student should be able to function as a part of a multidisciplinary team,
          develop an attitude of cooperation with colleagues, and interact with the patient
          and the clinician or    other colleagues to provide the best possible diagnosis or
          opinion.
2.        The student should always adopt ethical principles and maintain proper etiquette
          in dealings with patients, relatives and other health personnel and to respect the
          rights of the patient including the right to information, confidentiality and second
          opinion.
3.        The student should develop communication skills to prepare reports and
          professional opinion as well as to interact with patients, relatives, peers and
          paramedical staff, and for effective teaching.



C.        Psychomotor domain

At the end of the course, the student should acquire the following clinical skills and
be able to:



     1.    Obtain a proper relevant history and perform thorough clinical examination
           including detailed mental state examinations using proper communication skills.
     2.    Able to do risk assessment and mental capacity assessment.
     2.    Provide a clinical formulation, arrive at a logical working diagnosis and
           differential diagnosis after clinical examination.
     3.    Order appropriate investigations keeping in mind their relevance and cost
           effectiveness and obtain additional relevant information from family members
           to help in diagnosis and management.


                                                                                            5
   4.        Identify psychiatric situations calling for urgent or early intervention and refer
             at the optimum time to appropriate centres.
   5.        Write a complete case record with all necessary details.
   6.        Write a proper discharge summary with all relevant information.
   7.        Obtain informed consent for any examination/procedure.
   8.        Perform clinical audit.
   9.        Must be able to perform modified Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).
   10.       Should have the following skills in relation to gender related issues:
             Demonstrate the ability to assess the gender identity of an individual and
              distress caused (if any) due to the individual’s own gender identity in
              simulated environment.
             Describe and understand how to discuss sexual orientation, sexuality identity,
              gender identity, as well as intersex identity (differences in sex development)
              as part of routine history taking.
             Demonstrate the ability to educate and counsel individuals or family members
              about intersex variations, sexual orientations, sexuality identities, gender
              incongruence, gender dysphoria, and gender identities. Demonstrate ability to
              identify when a mental health referral is needed for the above.
             Demonstrate knowledge that conversion therapy practices for sexual
              orientation or gender identity or on people with intersex variations is
              unethical.
             Describe differences between Gender Incongruence and Gender Dysphoria.
             Describe and understand gender identity, the biological and gender binaries,
              rejection of gender binary, gender non-conforming, gender non-binary,
              androgynous, and other identities.
             Demonstrate the ability to educate an individual and family members that
              Gender Incongruence by itself is not a disorder and does not require clinical
              intervention. Any form of conversion therapy is unethical.
             Discuss situations where there is a role for mental health support in Gender
              Dysphoria i.e., discussing with family, deciding on hormonal treatments or
              Sex Reassignment Surgery (Gender Affirming Care or Gender Affirmative
              Therapies or Gender Confirmation Surgery).

The student, at the end of the course should be able to perform independently, the
following:
   1.        Conduct detailed Mental Status Examination (MSE)
   2.        Cognitive behaviour therapy
   3.        Supportive psychotherapy
   4.        Modified ECT and non-invasive neuromodulation
   5.        Clinical IQ assessment
   6.        Management of alcohol withdrawal
   7.        Alcohol intoxication management
   8.        Opioid withdrawal management
   9.        Delirious patients
   10.       Crisis intervention


The student must be able to assess a patient with following symptoms:
                                                                                             6
           1. Psychotic symptoms
           2. Seizures true and pseudo seizure
           3. Anxiety symptoms
           4. Affective symptoms
           5. Cognitive symptoms
           6. Catatonia
           7. Delirium
           8. Malingering
           9. Behavioral symptoms of developmental disorders

The student, at the end of the course should be able to perform under supervision,
the following:
   1. Behaviour therapy
   2. Family therapy
   3. Interpersonal therapy
   4. Cognitive behaviour therapy and other newer therapies
   5. First level psychological intervention for sexual abuse, sexual assault and domestic
        violence

   6. Genetic counselling

                                           Syllabus
Course Contents:


No limit can be fixed and no fixed number of topics can be prescribed as course contents.
The student is expected to know the subject in depth; however emphasis should be on the
diseases/health problems most prevalent in that area. Knowledge of recent advances and
basic sciences as applicable to his/her specialty should get high priority. Competence in
managing behavioural problems commensurate with the specialty must be ensured.

The student must acquire knowledge in the following:
Theoretical concepts:

   1.     Neurophysiology and Neuro-chemistry

   2.     Functional and behavioural neuroanatomy

   3.     Genetics

   4.     Psychoneuroendocrinology

   5.     Psychoneuroimmunology

   6.     Electrophysiology and cognitive neuroscience

   7.     Neuro-imaging

   8.     Memory

                                                                                             7
9.    Sleep and circadian rhythm

10.   Learning – Theories

11.   Theory of personality

12.   Clinical Psychology including Psychometry and Psychodiagnostics

13.   Transcultural Psychiatry

14.   Research Methodology and Statistics

15.   Psychodynamics

16.   Psychiatric assessment (including History Taking, Neurological Examination,
       Mental Status Examination, Investigations, Use of rating scales, etc.).

17.   Classification In Psychiatry

18.   Organic Psychiatry (including Psychological Features and Clinical Assessment
       of Cerebrovascular Disorders, Delirium, Epilepsy, Head Injury, Headache,
       HIV – AIDS, Infections, etc.)

19.   Movement Disorders (including Medication-Induced Movement Disorders, etc)

20.   Substance Related Disorders (including Alcohol-Related Disorders,
       Amphetamine-Related Disorders, Caffeine-Related Disorders, Cannabis-
       Related Disorders, Cocaine-Related Disorders, Hallucinogen-Related
       Disorders, Inhalant-Related Disorders, Nicotine-Related Disorders, Opioid-
       Related Disorders, Phencyclidine-Related Disorders, Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
       Anxiolytic-Related Disorders, etc.)

21.   Psychosis (including Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder,
       Schizoaffective Disorder, Delusional Disorder, Brief Psychotic Disorder,
       Shared Psychotic Disorder, etc).

22.   Mood Disorders (including Depressive Disorders, Bipolar Disorders,
       Cyclothymic Disorder, etc.)

23.   Anxiety Disorders (including Panic Disorder, Agoraphobia, Phobias,
       Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, etc).

24.   Stress and related disorders (Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, Acute Stress
       Disorder Adjustment Disorder etc.)

25.   Somatoform Disorders (including Somatization Disorder, Undifferentiated
       Somatoform Disorder, Conversion Disorder, Pain Disorder, Hypochondriasis,
       Body Dysmorphic Disorder, etc.)

26.   Factitious Disorders

27.   Dissociative Disorders (including Dissociative Amnesia, Dissociative Fugue,
       Dissociative Identity Disorder, Depersonalization Disorder, etc.)

28.   Personality disorders

29.   Sexual disorders, gender dysphoria and psychological issues among
       LGBTQIA+ groups (including Sexual Desire Disorders, Sexual arousal


                                                                                     8
       Disorders, Orgasmic Disorders, Sexual Pain Disorders, Vaginismus,
       Paraphilias, etc)

30.   Eating Disorders (including Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa, etc.)

31.   Sleep Disorders (including Insomnia, Narcolepsy, Breathing-Related Sleep
       Disorders, Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders, Parasomnias, Nightmare
       Disorder, Sleep Terror Disorder, Sleepwalking Disorder, etc.)

32.   Impulse-Control Disorders (including Intermittent Explosive Disorder,
       Kleptomania, Pyromania, Pathological Gambling, Trichotillomania, etc

33.   Psychosomatic Disorders including Consultation Liaison psychiatry

34.   Miscellaneous: Non-compliance, Malingering, Antisocial Behaviour,
       Borderline Intellectual Functioning, Age-Related Cognitive Decline,
       Bereavement [including Death], Academic Problems, Occupational Problems,
       Identity Problems, Religious or Spiritual Problems, Acculturation Problems,
       Phase of Life Problems, Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, etc.)

35.   Abuse (Physical / Sexual) or Neglect Of Child /Adult

36.   Culture Bound Syndromes

37.   Pre-Menstrual Dysphoric Disorder

38.   Perinatal Psychiatry

39.   Emergencies In Psychiatry including suicide, its management and medico-legal
       aspect

40.   Psychotherapy

41.   Psychopharmacology

42.   Electro-Convulsive Therapy,Other brain stimulation methods (rTMS, DBS,
       tDCS and others) and Neurosurgery

43.   Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (including Learning Disorders, Motor Skills
       Disorder, Communication Disorders, Pervasive Developmental Disorders
       (Autistic Disorder, Rett's Disorder, Childhood Disintegrative Disorder,
       Asperger's Disorder), Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Conduct
       Disorder, Oppositional Defiant Disorder, Pica, Tic Disorders, Elimination
       Disorders, Separation Anxiety Disorder, Selective Mutism, Reactive
       Attachment Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood, Stereotypic Movement
       Disorder, etc.)

44.   Intellectual disability

45.   Geriatric Psychiatry (including dementia, legal and ethical issues, positive
       psychiatry in aging, psychiatric aspects of long term care)

46.   Community psychiatry

47.   Rehabilitation of psychiatric patients

48.   Ethics In Psychiatry


                                                                                     9
     49.       Forensic and Legal Psychiatry (including Mental Health Care Act, Persons with
                Disability Act, Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act etc.)


The student may know the following:

     1. History of Psychiatry

     2. Epidemiology

     3. Mind – the evolving concepts

     4. Psychiatry rating scales

     5. Placebo Effect

     6. Sex and Gender Issues in Psychiatry

     7. Psychosurgery


                   TEACHING AND LEARNING METHODS
Teaching methodology
1.    Lectures: Lectures are to be kept to a minimum. They may, however, be employed
      for teaching certain topics. Lectures may be didactic or integrated. Didactic lectures
      are of least importance; small group discussion such as seminars, journal clubs,
      symposia, reviews and guest lecturers should get priority for theoretical knowledge.
      Bedside teaching, grand rounds, structured interactive group discussions and
      clinical demonstrations should be the hallmark of clinical/practical learning. The
      student should have hands-on training in performing various procedures and ability
      to       interpret   various   tests/investigations.   Exposure   to   newer   specialized
      diagnostic/therapeutic procedures concerning the subject should be given. Self
      learning tools like assignments and case base learning may be promoted.


      The post graduate student should have knowledge of:
           ●        Psycho-pharmacology and broadening the treatment options using
                    medicines.
           ●        Neuro-imaging techniques to understand behaviour and psychiatric
                    illness.
           ●        Community-Psychiatry.
           ●        Functioning of psychiatric hospital.


      Community Psychiatry should go beyond familiarization with the National Mental
      Health Programme. The post graduate student should have hands on experience
      with:

           ●        Training programmes for primary care physicians
           ●        Organizing Mental Health Camps

                                                                                             10
       ●       Carrying out Health Education Activities
       ●       Forensic /Legal Psychiatry
       ●       Integration of Mental Health Care with General Health Care


2.    Thesis writing: Thesis writing is compulsory.
3.    Research Methodology: The student should know the basic concepts of research
      methodology and biostatistics, plan a research project, understand ethical issues of
      research especially in vulnerable groups such as those with mental illness and
      intellectual disability as well as minors, be able to retrieve information from the
      library, use reference managers .
4.    Teaching skills: The post graduate students shall be required to participate in the
      teaching and training programme of undergraduate students and interns.
5.    Continuing Medical Education Programmes (CME): Each student should attend
      at least two CME programmes, in 3 years.

6.    Conferences: The student should attend courses, conferences and seminars relevant
      to the specialty, and encouraged to make presentation in conferences

7.    A post graduate student of a postgraduate degree course in broad specialties/super
      specialties would be required to present one poster presentation, to read one paper
      at a national/state conference and to present one research paper which should be
      published/accepted for publication/sent for publication during the period of his
      postgraduate studies so as to make him eligible to appear at the postgraduate degree
      examination.

8.    Seminars: There should be a weekly seminar in which the PG students present
      material on assigned topics in rotation. It should be followed by discussion in which
      all trainees are supposed to participate. Generally, the topics covered should be
      those that supplement the formal teaching programme.

9.    Case Conference: A case conference should be held every week where a PG
      student prepares and presents a case of academic interest by rotation and it is
      attended by all the members of the Department.
10.   Psychosomatic Rounds: This is a presentation of a case of psychosomatic illness,
      or a medical illness with pronounced psychiatric problems. It should be held weekly
      in collaboration with various departments and attended by the faculty and the PG
      students of psychiatry and the concerned Department.
11.   Research Forum: There should be a monthly meeting of one hour each in which
      the PG students present their plan of research as well as the report of the completed
      work of their projects. The other research scholars/staff in the department also may
      participate in it. The faculty, PG students and the non-medical professionals should
      make critical comments and suggestions.




                                                                                        11
12.    Journal Club: A monthly meeting of Journal club should be held in which a senior
       PG student presents a critical evaluation of a research paper from a journal. All PG
       students are expected to attend.
13.    Case presentations: All new in-patients and outpatients cases should be routinely
       reviewed with one of the Consultants. In addition, the PG student is required to
       present case material at routine rounds and other case conferences. Senior PG
       students will conduct evening classes on clinical topics.
14.    Extra-mural activities: The post graduate students are encouraged to attend certain
       academic activities in allied subjects held outside parent department e.g.
       seminars/lectures held at Departments of Sociology, Psychology, Neurology etc.
15.    Psychotherapy tutorials: These should be held in small groups supervised by a
       consultant, in which a case is presented by a PG student and psychotherapeutic
       management discussed.
16.    Rotation:
       Clinical Postings
       ●         A major tenure of posting should be in General Psychiatry. It should
           include care of in-patients, out-patients, special clinics and maintenance of case
           records for both in and out patients.
       ●         Exposure to the following areas should be given :-

        Schedule of clinical postings for M.D Psychiatry *(36 months)

       Area/ Specialty

       Ward and OPD (Concurrent)                            18 months
       Neurology                                             2 months
       Emergency Medicine/ Internal Medicine                 1 month
       Consultation Liaison Psychiatry                       3 months
       Psychiatric hospital and Forensic Psychiatry          1 month
       Clinical Psychology                                   1 month
       Addiction Psychiatry                                  3 months
       Child and Adolescent Psychiatry                       3 months
       Community psychiatry                                  2 months#
       Elective posting                                      2 months (as per choice
                                                               in the same Institute)

      * The stated duration can be subjected to minor modifications depending on available
        resources

#     Exposure to community based services should be integral to various postings.

    Applicable only for trainees in General Hospital Psychiatric units: Facilities for
    these need to be arranged.
    The post graduate student in Psychiatric hospitals would have extended period of
    exposure to consultation - liaison psychiatry and other medical specialties. Exposure to
    community based services should be integral part of various postings. The post
    graduate student shall be given full responsibility for patient care and record keeping
    under the supervision of the senior PG students and consultants. The post graduate

                                                                                          12
 student shall also take patients for psychological interventions in an individual as well
 as group setting. S/he must complete a minimum of 100 hours of supervised
 psychological interventions.

 ●     Inter-Unit Rotation of posting
       Inter-unit rotation in the department should be done for a period of up to one year
       (divided during the first year and third year while the post graduate student stays
       in the parent unit throughout the duration of his thesis work).

17.   Clinical meetings:

      There should be intra - and inter - departmental meetings for discussing the
      uncommon / interesting medical problems.
 18. Log book:
      Each student must be asked to present a specified number of cases for clinical
      discussion, perform procedures/present seminars/review articles from various
      journals in inter-unit/interdepartmental teaching sessions. They should be entered in
      a Log Book and signed by the authorized teacher and Head of Department.

19.   The Department should encourage e-learning activities.


During the training programme, patient safety is of paramount importance,
therefore, skills are to be learnt initially on the models, later to be performed under
supervision followed by performing independently. For this purpose, provision of
clinical skills laboratories in medical colleges is mandatory. Objective structured
clinical examination (OSCE) modules may be developed and used in teaching.



                                  ASSESSMENT

FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT, ie., assessment during the training


Formative assessment should be continual and should assess medical knowledge,
patient care, procedural & academic skills, interpersonal skills, professionalism, self
directed learning and ability to practice in the system.


Quarterly assessment during the MD training should be based on:
       1. Journal based / recent advances learning
       2. Patient based /Laboratory or Skill based learning
       3. Self directed learning and teaching
       4. Departmental and interdepartmental learning activity
       5. External and Outreach Activities / CMEs
       6. Professionalism and teamwork



                                                                                        13
The student to be assessed periodically as per categories listed in postgraduate
student appraisal form (Annexure I).
SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT, ie., at the end of training

The summative examination would be carried out as per the Rules given in
POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION REGULATIONS, 2000.

 The examination shall be in three parts:

1. Thesis
     Thesis shall be submitted at least six months before the Theory and Clinical /
     Practical examination. The thesis shall be examined by a minimum of three
     examiners; one internal and two external examiners, who shall not be the examiners
     for Theory and Clinical examination. A post graduate student shall be allowed to
     appear for the Theory and Practical/Clinical examination only after the acceptance of
     the Thesis by the examiners.

2. Theory Examination:

     There shall be four papers each of three hours duration.
     Paper I:     Basic Sciences as related to Psychiatry
     Paper II:    Clinical Psychiatry
     Paper III: Psychiatric Specialties
     Paper IV:    Recent Advances


3.      Clinical/Practical and Oral/viva voce examination should consist of:
        ●        Presentation of long case of Psychiatry
        ●        Neurology short case
        ●        A short case Psychiatry
        ●        Viva –voce
        Due importance should be given to Log Book Records and day-to-day
        observation during the training.


Recommended Reading
Books (latest edition)


     1. Textbook of Psychiatry Publisher: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Editors:
        Benjamin James Sadock, Virginia Alcott Sadock, Pedro Ruiz
     2. Kaplan and Sadock’s Synopsis of Psychiatry, Editor: RJ Boland, ML Verduin, P
        Ruiz; Publisher: Wolters Kluver India
     3. Introduction to Psychology by Clifford T. Morgan Editors: Clifford T Morgan,
        Richard A King, John R Weiss, John Schopler, Publisher: MC Graw Hill




                                                                                       14
4. New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry Edited by: John R. Geddes, Nancy C.
   Andreas and Guy M. Goodwin, Publisher: Oxford
5. Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific Basis and Practical
   Applications, Editor: Stephen M Stahl, Publisher: Cambridge
6. Forensic Psychiatry: RC Jiloha, D Kataria, P Kukreti (Jaypee)
7. ECT administration manual, NIMHANS Editors: Bangalore N Gangadhar, A
   Shyam Sundar, Jagadisha Thirthalli, Shivarama Varambally, Kesavan
   Muralidharan, C Naveen Kumar, Preeti Sinha, Biju Viswanath, Publisher:
   NIMHANS
8. Community Psychiatry in India (Eds Chavan, Gupta, Arun, Sidana, Jadav)
   Jaypee.
9. Fish’s Clinical Psychopathology – Signs and Symptoms In Psychiatry By Patricia
   Casey, Editor: Patricia Casey, Brendan Kelly, Publisher: Tree Life Media
10. Sims Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive psychopathology, Editor:
   Femi Oyebode, Publisher: Elsevier
11. Bickerstaff’s Neurological Examination in Clinical practice, Editor: Kameshwar
   Prasad, Ravi Yadav, John Spillane, Publisher: Wiley
12. A Primer of Research, Publication and Presentation: Sandeep Grover, Shahul
   Amin, Jaypee
13. Maudsley’s Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry, Editors: Author: David M.
   Taylor, Thomas R. E. Barnes, Allen Young, Publisher: Wiley
14. Lishman’s Organic Psychiatry Editor: Anthony S. David, Simon Fleminger,
   Michael D. Kopelman, Publisher: Wiley Blackwell
15. Kaufman's Clinical Neurology for Psychiatrists, Elsevier.


Journals
03-05 international Journals and 02 national (all indexed) journals.




                                                                                 15
                                                                                                  Appendix 1
                  Student appraisal form for MD in Psychiatry
                                              Less than                             More than
                                                                Satisfactory                          Comments
      Element                                Satisfactory                          satisfactory
                                         1        2     3   4        5     6   7        8         9
      Scholastic Aptitude and
 1    Learning
      Has Knowledge appropriate
1.1
      for level of training
      Participation and contribution
      to learning activity
1.2   (e.g., Journal Club,
      Seminars, CME etc)
      Conduct of research and
      other scholarly activity
1.3   assigned (e.g. Posters,
      publications etc.)
      Documentation of acquisition
      of competence (eg Log
1.4
      book)
      Performance in work based
1.5
      assessments
1.6   Self- directed Learning
 2    Care of the patient
      Ability to provide patient care
2.1   appropriate to level of
      training
      Ability to work with other
2.2   members of the health care
      team
      Ability to communicate
      appropriately and
2.3   empathetically with patients
      families and care givers
      Ability to do procedures
2.4   appropriate for the level of
      training and assigned role
      Ability to record and
      document work accurately
2.5   and appropriate for level of
      training
      Participation and contribution
2.6   to health care quality
      improvement
 3    Professional attributes
      Responsibility and
3.1
      accountability
      Contribution to growth of
3.2
      learning of the team
      Conduct that is ethically
      appropriate and respectful at
3.3
      all times

      Space for additional
 4    comments



 5    Disposition

      Has this assessment been
      discussed with the trainee?       Yes      No

      If not explain




                                                                                                           16
Name and Signature of the
assesse


Name and Signature of the
assessor
Date




                            17
Module on Gender related Issues and Gender Dysphoria for the MD
Curriculum of Psychiatry

At the end of the course the student will be able to:
      Demonstrate the ability to assess the gender identity of an individual and distress
       caused (if any) due to the individual’s own gender identity in simulated
       environment.
      Describe and understand how to discuss sexual orientation, sexuality identity,
       gender identity, as well as intersex identity (differences in sex development) as
       part of routine history taking.
      Demonstrate the ability to educate and counsel individuals or family members
       about intersex variations, sexual orientations, sexuality identities, gender
       incongruence, gender dysphoria, and gender identities. Demonstrate ability to
       identify when a mental health referral is needed for the above.
      Demonstrate knowledge that conversion therapy practices for sexual orientation
       or gender identity or on people with intersex variations is unethical.
      Describe differences between Gender Incongruence and Gender Dysphoria.
      Describe and understand gender identity, the biological and gender binaries,
       rejection of gender binary, gender non-conforming, gender non-binary,
       androgynous, and other identities.
      Demonstrate the ability to educate an individual and family members that Gender
       Incongruence by itself is not a disorder and does not require clinical intervention.
       Any form of conversion therapy is unethical.
      Discuss situations where there is a role for mental health support in Gender
       Dysphoria i.e., discussing with family, deciding on hormonal treatments or Sex
       Reassignment Surgery (Gender Affirming Care or Gender Affirmative Therapies
       or Gender Confirmation Surgery).




                                                                                           18
Subject Expert Group members for preparation of REVISED
Guidelines for competency based postgraduate training programme for
MD in Psychiatry

  1. Dr Rakesh K Chadda,
     Professor & Head,                                        Convener
     Department of Psychiatry, and Chief,
     National Drug Dependence Treatment Centre,
     AIIMS, New Delhi 110029.

  2. Dr Prabha S. Chandra,
     Professor,                                               Member
     Department of Psychiatry,
     National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences,
     Bangalore 560029.

  3. Dr. Debasish Basu,                                       Member
     Professor and Head,
     Department of Psychiatry, PGIMER,
     Chandigarh 160012.

  4. Dr Vivek Agarwal,                                        Member
     Professor and Head,
     Department of Psychiatry,
     KGMU, Lucknow 226003.

  5. Dr Basudeb Das,                                          Member
     Director,
     Central Institute of Psychiatry,
     Kanke, Ranchi 834006.

  6. Dr Deepak Kumar,                                         Member
     Professor and Head,
     Department of Psychiatry,
     Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences,
     Delhi 110095.




                                                                         19
